
THE
FIRST-TIME
MANAGER
FIFTH EDITION
PAGE i.................11066$$$FM 11-23-04 15:23:09 PS
This page intentionally left blank
	
	
									
				
							 !	!
"	!		
#	$	!	%
&'	( &&)
THE
FIRST-TIME
MANAGER
PAGE iii.................11066$$$FM 11-23-04 15:23:09 PS
Special discounts on bulk quantities of AMACOM books are
available to corporations, professional associations, and other
organizations. For details, contact Special Sales Department,
AMACOM, a division of American Management Association,
1601 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.
Tel.: 212-903-8316. Fax: 212-903-8083.
Web Site: www.amacombooks.org
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or
other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Belker, Loren B.
The Þrst-time manager / Loren B. Belker, Gary S. Topchik.Ñ5th ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-8144-0821-4
1. Supervision of employees. 2. OfÞce management. I. Topchik, Gary S. II.
Title.
HF5549 .12 .B453 2005
658.302Ñdc22
2004019486
2005, 1997, 1993, 1986, and 1981 AMACOM, a division of
American Management Association, New York.
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
This publication may not be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in whole or in part,
in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of AMACOM,
a division of American Management Association,
1601 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.
Printing number
10987654321
PAGE iv.................11066$$$FM 11-23-04 15:23:10 PS
Contents
Prefacevii
Acknowledgmentsix
Introductionxi
P
ARTONESOYOU'REGOING TOMANAGEPEOPLE1
1. The Road to Management 3
2. Starting Out 8
3. Building Trust and ConÞdence 15
4. Show Your Appreciation 19
5. Being an Active Listener 22
6. The New ManagerÕs Job and Pitfalls to Avoid 28
7. Dealing with Your Superiors 32
8. Choosing a Managerial Style of Your Own 39
9. Building Team Spirit 43
P
ARTTWOTACKLINGYOURNEWDUTIES47
10. Managing Problem Employees 49
11. Hiring and Interviewing 56
12. Training Team Members 68
13. Managing Change: Dealing with Resistance 75
14. Disciplining the Employee 78
15. ÔÔOh My God! I CanÕt Fire Anyone!ÕÕ 87
16. Having a Legal Awareness 96
PAGE v
v
.................11066$CNTS 11-23-04 15:23:12 PS
viContents
PARTTHREEWORKING WITHPEOPLE ANDBUILDING
RELATIONSHIPS103
17. No Secrets 105
18. The Human Resources Department 108
19. The Current State of Loyalty 111
20. Is There Such a Thing as Motivation? 113
21. The Generation Gap 119
P
ARTFOURJOBDESCRIPTIONS,PERFORMANCEAPPRAISALS,
ANDSALARYADMINISTRATION123
22. Writing Job Descriptions 125
23. Doing Performance Appraisals 128
24. Salary Administration 140
P
ARTFIVEIMPROVING ANDDEVELOPINGYOURSELF145
25. Having Emotional Intelligence 147
26. Developing a Positive Self-Image 150
27. Managing Your Own Time 167
28. The Written Word 174
29. The Grapevine 178
30. Your Best Friend: Delegation 180
31. A Sense of Humor 184
32. Managing, Participating in, and Leading Meetings 188
33. Taking Center Stage: The Role of Public Speaking in
Your Career 195
P
ARTSIXTHECOMPLETEPERSON201
34. Coping with Stress 203
35. Having Balance in Your Life 207
36. A Touch of Class 210
Conclusion212
Index217
PAGE vi.................11066$CNTS 11-23-04 15:23:12 PS
Preface
It has truly been an honor to be asked by AMACOM Booksto
prepare theÞfth edition of this book. TheÞrst four editions,
magniÞcently written by Loren B. Belker, have been very suc-
cessful in helping new managers to develop into highly effective
leaders within their organizations.
I regret having to say that Loren has passed away. He will
be greatly missed by all of those close to himÑfamily, friends,
and colleaguesÑand the countless managers who have been
helped by his writing and lectures.
It is with great pride that I have prepared this new edition
ofThe First-Time Manager. LorenÕs insights and deep under-
standing of the management function go unparalleled. I have
just tried to update some of the materials and share my own
thoughts on what a successful manager needs to do.
Respectfully,
Gary S. Topchik
PAGE vii
vii
.................11066$PREF 11-23-04 15:23:16 PS
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments
People often have a greater impact on our livesthan theyÕre
aware of at the time.
Many people have participated in my management semi-
nars. Their desire to improve their management skills has been
theirÞrst step in becoming humane and enlightened leaders of
people. TheyÕve been willing to set aside previously held atti-
tudes of what a manager ought to be.
There are also the organizations and the enterprises that
have seen the great value in educating and developing their
managers. They have realized that their success directly corre-
lates to the skills and talents of their management teams.
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my editor and
friend, Adrienne Hickey, editorial director at AMACOM. Her
insights and encouragement on the revisions and new editions
have played a major role in the success of this book.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge my life partner,
friends, especially Alexandra, and family members. They have
been my source of encouragement and inspiration.
ÑGST
PAGE ix
ix
.................11066$$ACK 11-23-04 15:23:19 PS
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction
So, what exactly is a new manager supposed to do?You have no
doubt met bosses who feel that their job is to tell others what to
do. Unfortunately, these managers really have not learned what
their role is. It is not to direct people, although some of that may
be needed. Rather, management should be the process of getting
people to become self-directed. TheÞfth edition ofThe First-Time
Managerwill enable you to do that.
Application of the principles described in this book should
beneÞt anyone who is about to embark on a managerial career.
Our relationship with other human beings is the most challeng-
ing opportunity that exists for us. It covers all aspects of our
lives.
If you are going to be a respected manager, you need toÞnd
opportunities to gain the support and commitment of your di-
rect reports without having to use your positional power (your
title) over them. The best managers get their team members to
willingly do what they are supposed to, as opposed to doing it
only because the manager said so.
There are many books published on the subject of manage-
ment, but few of these books addressÑor zero in onÑthose in-
dividuals who are about to begin a career of leading other
people. TheseÞrst-time managers are not interested in a lot of
PAGE xi
xi
.................11066$INTR 11-23-04 15:23:23 PS
xiiIntroduction
academic jargon; rather, they are in a state of mixed emotion
 - 
absolutely delighted with the promotion and absolutely panic-
stricken with the realization that from now on they'll be judged
by how well their direct reports perform.
This book is for those people, not for top management with
twenty years
'experience, even though many top managers
would do well to refresh their acquaintance with some of the
basic principles that will be discussed in this book. In fact, a
comment often heard at seminars for new managers is,''My
boss needs this information and these skills even more than I
do.
''This then, creates for the new manager the problem of how
you manage in an environment where your own manager vio-
lates principles and concepts that you practice and believe in.
This new edition helps you succeed with your direct reports,
even though your managers and your organization may not be
doing exactly what they should be.
This book is written in a conversational manner, making it
easy for you to follow along and absorb the ideas presented.
You'llfind it easy to refer back to specific areas when problems
arise in the future. After several months of managing people,
reread the book. Many of the concepts will take on additional
usefulness at that time.
New chapters have been added in thisfifth edition, and
many others have been modified or enlarged. For example, there
is expanded information on building trust and confidence, per-
formance appraisals, motivating other people, being an active
listener, dealing with resistance to change, managing a diverse
group of individuals, and building a team environment.
Lastly, almost all the problems you will encounter as a new
manager may be new to you, but they've been experienced by
many others. The challenges you encounter are balanced by the
joy and satisfaction of a management job well done.
Thanks for deciding to spend some time withThe First-Time
Manager.
PAGE xii.................11066$INTR 11-23-04 15:23:23 PS
PARTONE
SOYOU'REGOING TO
MANAGEPEOPLE
PAGE 1.................11066$PRT1 11-23-04 15:23:27 PS
This page intentionally left blank
1
The Road to Management
There are many different waysthat individuals become man-
agers.
Unfortunately, many companies donÕt go through a very
thorough process in choosing those who are to be moved into
managerial positions. Often the judgment is based solely on how
well the person is performing in the currently assigned task. The
best performer doesnÕt always make the best manager, although
many companies still make the choice on that basis. The theory
is that successful past performance is the best indicator of future
success. However, management skills are very different from the
skills one needs to succeed as an individual contributor.
So, the fact that an employee is a good performer, even
though it demonstrates a success pattern, doesnÕt necessarily
mean the person will be a successful manager. Being a manager
requires skills beyond those of being an excellent technician.
Managers need to focus on people, not just tasks. They need to
rely on others, not just be self-reliant. Managers are also team
oriented and big picture oriented, whereas nonmanagers suc-
ceed by being individually oriented and detail oriented.
Management Is Not for Everyone
Some companies have management-training programs. These
programs vary from excellent to horrible. Too often, the program
PAGE 3
3
.................11066$$CH1 11-23-04 15:23:54 PS
4So You're Going to Manage People
is given to people who already have been in managerial posi-
tions for a number of years. Even experienced managers periodi-
cally should be given refresher courses in management style and
techniques. However, if a training program has any merit, it
should be given to individuals who are being considered for
management positions. While helping them to avoid mistakes,
the training program also gives trainees the opportunity to see
whether they will be comfortable leading others.
Unfortunately, far too many organizations still use the
''
swim or sink
''method of management training. All employees
who move into supervisory positions mustfigure it out on their
own. This method assumes that everyone intuitively knows how
to manage. They don
'
t. Managing people is crucial to the success
of any organization; but in too many cases, it is left to chance.
Anyone who has worked for any length of time has observed
situations where a promotion didn't work out and the person
asked for the old job back. There is an old cliche
´that goes like
this:''Be careful what you wish for, because you just might get
it.
''In many companies, the opportunities for promotion are
limited if you don't go into management. As a result, some peo-
ple go into management who shouldn
'
t be there
 - 
and they
wouldn
'
t want to be in management if other opportunities ex-
isted for salary increases and promotion.
A series of management seminars was conducted for one
company that used an enlightened approach to the problem of
moving the wrong people into management. Everyone under
potential consideration for afirst-line management position was
invited to attend an all-day seminar on what is involved in the
management of people. Included were some simple but typical
management problems. When these candidates were invited to
attend, they were told by the company,''If after attending this
seminar you decide that the management of people is not some-
thing you want to do, just say so. That decision will in no way
affect other nonmanagement promotion possibilities or future
salary decisions in your current position.''
Approximately 500 people attended these seminars, and ap-
proximately 20 percent decided they did not want to move into
management. After getting a brief taste of management, approx-
imately 100 people knew they would not make good managers,
PAGE 4.................11066$$CH1 11-23-04 15:23:54 PS
The Road to Management5
but they were still valuable employees. Far too many people ac-
cept management promotions because they feel (often rightly
so) that they will be dead-ended if they reject the promotion.
The Omnipotent
There are some people who believe that if you want something
done right, you'd better do it yourself. People with this attitude
rarely make good leaders or managers because they have dif
fi
-
culty delegating responsibility. Everyone has seen these people:
They delegate only those trivial tasks that anyone could per-
form, and anything meaningful they keep for themselves. As a
result, they work evenings and weekends and take a briefcase
home as well. There is nothing wrong with working overtime.
Most people occasionally must devote some extra time to the
job, but those who follow this pattern as a way of life are poor
managers. They have so little faith in their direct reports that
they trust them with nothing important. What they are really
saying is that they don't know how to properly train their
people.
There is usually a staff turnover problem in a section with
this kind of manager. The employees are usually more qualified
than the''omnipotent''believes and they soon tire of handling
only trivia.
You probably know of an omnipotent in your own office or
plant. It is a problem if you
'
re working for one, because you'll
have a dif
fi
cult time being promoted. Caught up in your impos-
sible situation, you
'
re not given anything responsible to do. As
a result, you never get a chance to demonstrate what you can do.
Omnipotents seldom give out recommendations for promotion.
They are convinced that the reason they must do all the work is
that their staff doesn
'
t accept responsibility. They can never
admit that it is because they refuse to delegate. Particular atten-
tion has been given to omnipotents, primarily so that you don
'
t
allow yourself to fall into this mode of behavior.
One other unvarying trait of omnipotents is that they sel-
dom take their vacations all at once. They only take a couple
PAGE 5.................11066$$CH1 11-23-04 15:23:54 PS
6So You're Going to Manage People
days off at a time because they are certain the company can't
function longer than that without them. Before going on vaca-
tion, they will leave speci
fi
c instructions as to what work is to be
saved until their return. In some situations, they
'
ll leave a phone
number where they can be reached in an emergency. Of course,
they de
fi
ne what the emergency might be. The omnipotent even
complains to family and friends,''I can't even get away from the
problems at work for a few days without being bothered.
''What
omnipotents don
'
t say is that this is exactly the way they want
it because it makes them feel important. For some omnipotent
managers, their retirement years are demolished because retire-
ment means abolition of their reason for living, their dedication
to the job, and their perceived indispensability.
The Chosen Few
Sometimes, people are also chosen to head a function because
they
'
re related to or have an''in''with the boss. Consider your-
self fortunate if you do not work for this type of company. Even
if youarerelated to the boss, it's very difficult to assume addi-
tional responsibility under these circumstances. You doubtless
have the authority, but today
'
s businesses aren
'
t dictatorships
and people won
'
t perform well for you just because you
'
ve been
anointed by upper management. So, if you're the boss's son or
daughter or friend, you really need to prove yourself. You'll get
surface respect or positional respect, but let's face it - it's what
people really think of you, not what they say to you, that matters
and that affects how they perform.
In the best organizations, you
'
re not chosen for a manage-
rial position because of your technical knowledge. You're chosen
because someone has seen the spark of leadership in you. That
is the spark you must start developing. Leadership is difficult to
de
fi
ne. A leader is a person others look to for direction, a person
whose judgment is respected because it is usually sound. As you
exercise your judgment and develop the capacity to make sound
decisions, it becomes a self-perpetuating characteristic. Your
faith in your own decision-making power is forti
fi
ed. That feeds
PAGE 6.................11066$$CH1 11-23-04 15:23:55 PS
The Road to Management7
your self-con
fi
dence, and with more self-con
fi
dence, you be-
come less reluctant to make dif
fi
cult decisions.
Leaders are people who can see into the future and visual-
ize the results of their decision making. Leaders can also set
aside matters of personality and make decisions based on fact.
This doesn
'
t mean you ignore the human element - you never
ignore it
 - 
but you deal always with the facts themselves, not
with people
'
s emotional perception of those facts.
People are chosen to be managers for a variety of reasons. If
you
'
re chosen for sound reasons, your acceptance by your new
direct reports will, for the most part, be much easier to gain.
PAGE 7.................11066$$CH1 11-23-04 15:23:55 PS
2
Starting Out
Your Þrst week on the jobas a manager will be unusual, to say
the least. If youÕre a student of human behavior, youÕll observe
some surprising developments.
Settling In
DonÕt believe that everyone is happy about the choice of the new
kid on the block. Some of your coworkers will feeltheyshould
have been chosen. They may be jealous of your new promotion
and secretly hope you fall on your face.
Others, the ofÞceÔÔyes people,ÕÕwill immediately start play-
ing up to you. As the chosen one, you can be their ticket to
success. Their objective isnÕt all bad, but their method of opera-
tion leaves something to be desired.
Some coworkers will put you to the test early. They may
ask you questions to see if you know the answers. If you donÕt,
theyÕll want to see if youÕll admit it or if youÕll try to bluff your
way through it. Some may ask you questions you cannot possi-
bly know the answers to yet, for the sheer delight of embarrass-
ing you.
MostÑyou hope the majorityÑwill adopt a wait-and-see
PAGE 8
8
.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:00 PS
Starting Out9
attitude. They
Õ
re not going to condemn or praise you until they
see how you perform. This attitude is healthy and all you really
have a right to expect.
You will be measured initially against your predecessor in
the position. If that person
Õ
s performance was miserable, yours
will look great by comparison even if it
Õ
s mediocre. If you follow
a highly capable performer, your adjustment will be tougher.
Before you begin thinking it
Õ
s best to follow a miserable perfor-
mer, consider the load of tough problems you would be inherit-
ing from your inept predecessor, which is why you
Õ
re there. The
highly capable predecessor is probably gone because he or she
was promoted. So, in either case, you have a big job ahead of
you.
One of yourÞrst decisions should be to refrain from imme-
diately instituting changes in the method of operation. (In ab-
normal situations, top management may have instructed you to
go in and make certain immediate changes because of the seri-
ousness of the situation. In such cases, however, it is usually
announced that changes will be forthcoming.) Above all, be pa-
tient. If you make changes immediately, you
Õ
ll be resented. Your
actions will be construed as being arrogant and an insult to your
predecessor. Many young new leaders make their own lives
more dif
Þ
cult by assuming they have to use all their newfound
power immediately. The key word should berestraint.Whether
or not you want to admit it, youÕre the one who is on trial with
your subordinates, not they with you.
This is a good time to make an important point about your
own attitude. Many new managers communicate rather well up-
ward to their superiors, but poorly downward to their direct
reports. Your direct reports will have more to say about your
future than your superiors. You are going to be judged by how
well your section or department functions, so the people who
now work for you are the most important in your business life.
Believe it or not, they
Õ
re more important even than the president
of your company. This bit of knowledge has always seemed ob-
vious, yet many new managers spend almost all their time plan-
ning their upward communication and give only a passing
glance to the people who really control their future.
PAGE 9.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:00 PS
10So Youíre Going to Manage People
Using Your New Authority
If there is one area that many new managers blunder into, it is
the use of authority. This is particularly true of new managers
who are navigating their way through a self-directed''swim or
sink
''method of on-the-job training. It is the idea that because
you now have the authority of management, you must start
using it
 - 
and you must use and display it in a big way. It may
be the biggest mistake that new managers make.
View the authority of the new position as you would a
storehouse of supplies. The fewer times you take supplies from
the storehouse, the greater is the supply that remains there for
when it isreallyneeded.
The newly appointed manager who starts acting like''the
boss
''and begins issuing orders and other directives is off to a
bad start. While you may not hear the remarks directly, the typi-
cal comments made behind the back of such a misguided man-
ager might be,''Boy, is she drunk with power,''or''This job has
really gone to his head,
''or''His hat size has gone up two sizes
since he was promoted.
''You don't need this kind of problem.
If you don
'
t go to the storehouse of authority too often, the
authority you may have to use in an emergency is more effective
because it is infrequently displayed. The people you supervise
know that you are the manager. They know that the request you
make carries the authority of the position. The vast majority of
the time, it is unnecessary to use that authority.
There is a term in the creative arts calledunderstatement.For
the most part, it means that what is left unsaid may be as impor-
tant as what is said. This is true with the use of authority. A
direction given as a request is a managerial type of understate-
ment. If the response is not forthcoming, you can always clarify
or add a bit of authority. On the other hand, if you use all your
authority to achieve a task, and then discover by the reaction
that you have used too much, the damage is done. It is difficult,
if not impossible, to de-escalate the overuse of that authority.
In short, do not assume that you need to use the authority
of your position. Perhaps the greatest by-product of this softer
approach is you are not building a negative image that may be
nearly impossible to erase later.
PAGE 10.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:00 PS
Starting Out11
Having the Personal Touch
Sometime during thefirst sixty days on the job, you should plan
on having a personal conversation with each of the people in
your area of responsibility. Don
'
t do this thefirst week or so.
Give your reports a chance to get used to the idea that you are
there. When it comes time to talk, the conversation should be
formal in nature. Ask your reports into your office for an unhur-
ried discussion about anything that is on their minds. Do no
more talking yourself than necessary. Thisfirst formal discus-
sion is not designed for you to communicate with the others; it
is designed to open lines of communication from them to you.
(Have you ever noticed that the more you allow the other person
to talk, the higher you'll be rated as a brilliant conversationalist?)
Although the employee's personal concerns are important,
it is preferable to restrict the discussion to work-related topics.
Sometimes it is dif
fi
cult to de
fi
ne these limits because problems
at home may be troubling the employee more than anything
else, but at all times you must avoid getting into a situation
where you
'
re giving personal advice. Just because you
'
ve been
anointed as the boss, it doesn
'
t make you an expert on all the
personal problems confronting your people. Listen to them;
often that is what they need more than anything else
 - 
someone
to listen to them.
Getting to Know Them
Now let's get back to your conversation with your team mem-
bers. The purpose is to give them the opportunity to open the
lines of communication with you. Show a genuine interest in
their concerns; learn what their ambitions are within the com-
pany. Ask questions that will get them to expand on their points
of view. You can
'
t fake genuine interest in others; you're doing
this because you care about the employees
'well-being. Such at-
tention is advantageous to both sides. If you can help employees
achieve their goals, they'll be more productive. What is more
important is their belief that they're making progress toward
their goals.
PAGE 11.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:00 PS
12So Youíre Going to Manage People
So your goal in these early conversations is to let your team
members know you care about them as individuals and you
'
re
there to help them achieve their goals. Let them know you want
to help them solve whatever problems they may be having with
the job. Establish a comfort zone in which they can deal with
you. Make them feel that it is perfectly natural for them to dis-
cuss small problems with you. By discussing small problems
and small irritants, you can probably avoid most of the larger
problems.
You'll discover in yourfirst few months as a manager that
your technical abilities are not nearly as important as your
human abilities. The majority of your problems are going to re-
volve around the human and not the technical aspects of the
job. Unless your responsibilities are technically complex, you
'
ll
discover that if you have outstanding human skills, you can
overlook your minor technical deficiencies. Conversely, even if
you are the most technically competent manager in the of
fi
ce,
without human skills you'll have great difficulty.
Having Friends in the Department
One of the problems many new executives confront is handling
friendships with people in the department who now become
their employees. This is a difficult situation to which there is no
perfect answer. One of the most common questions new manag-
ers ask is,''Can I still be friends with the people who used to be
my coworkers and who are now my employees?
It is obvious that you shouldn't have to give up your friend-
ships simply because you
'
ve received a promotion. However,
you don
'
t want your friendships to hurt your performance or
the performance of your friends.
It is a mistake to allow your friendships to interfere with
your method of operation. A direct report who is truly a friend
will understand the dilemma in which youfind yourself.
You must be certain that coworkers who were your friends
before you became their supervisor receive the same treatment
as everyone else. And that doesn
'
t just mean favoring them over
other workers. They must not be treated worse merely to prove
to the others how unbiased you are.
PAGE 12.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:01 PS
Starting Out13
Although it is certainly true that you can be friends with
people, you cannot expect to be friends with them in the same
way in the context of work. As a new manager, you will need to
establish some expectations of how you will work with all of
your team members, whether they are friends or not. You need
to hold all individuals to the same rules, regulations, and ac-
countability standards. Also keep in mind that what might look
like friendship to you can often look like favoritism to others.
There is a temptation to use your old friend in the depart-
ment as a conÞdant. You do not want to give the impression that
you are playing favorites. In fact, you must not play favorites. If
you do need a con
Þ
dant, it is preferable to use a manager in
another department or section of the organization.
Managing Your Mood
People who report to you are very aware of what kind of mood
you are in, especially if you tend to have wild mood swings.
Temper tantrums have no place in the work habits of a mature
manager
Ñ
and maturity has nothing to do with age. Letting
your irritation show occasionally can be effective, as long as it is
sincere and not manipulative.
All of us, from time to time at the of
Þ
ce, fall under the spell
of moods that re
ß
ect outside situations that are troubling us.
Many books on management tell us we must leave our problems
at the door, or at home, and not bring them into the ofÞce. That
attitude is naive, because few people can completely shut off a
personal problem and keep it from affecting how they perform
on the job.
There is little doubt, however, that you can minimize the
impact a problem has on your work. TheÞrst step is to admit
that something is irritating you and that it may affect your
relationship with your coworkers. If you can do that, you can
probably avoid making other people victims of your personal
problem. If an outside problem is gnawing at you and you need
to deal with an employee in a critical situation, there is nothing
wrong with saying to the employee,ÔÔLook, IÕm really not in the
PAGE 13.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:01 PS
14So Youíre Going to Manage People
greatest mood today. If I seem a little irritated, I hope you'll
forgive me.
''This kind of candor is refreshing to a subordinate.
Never think for a moment that others don't have the ability
to judge your moods. By showing dramatic changes of mood,
you become less effective. In addition, your direct reports will
know when to expect these changes, what the telltale signs are,
and they will avoid dealing with you when you
'
re on the bottom
swing of such a mood. They
'
ll wait until you
'
re on the high end
of the pendulum.
Managing Your Feelings
You should work hard at being even-tempered. But it is not a
good idea to be the kind of manager who is never bothered by
anything
 - 
a person who never seems to feel great joy, great sor-
row, or great anything. People will not identify with you if they
believe you disguise all your feelings.
Keeping your cool all the time is another matter. There are
good reasons for keeping your cool. If you can always remain
calm, even in troubled situations, you
'
re more likely to think
clearly and so be in a better position to handle tough problems.
It
'
s also important that you show feelings once in a while, how-
ever, or people will think you
'
re a management robot.
To be an outstanding manager of people, you must care
about people. That doesn
'
t mean taking a missionary or social
worker approach toward them, but if you enjoy their company
and respect their feelings, you
'
ll be much more effective in your
job than the supervisor who is mostly''thing''oriented.
This, indeed, is one of the problems companies bring on
themselves when they assume that the most efficient worker in
an area is the one who should be promoted to management.
That worker may be efficient because of being thing oriented.
Moving these so-called experts into areas where they supervise
others doesn
'
t automatically make them''people''oriented.
PAGE 14.................11066$$CH2 11-23-04 15:24:01 PS
3
Building Trust and
ConÞdence
Building conÞdence is a gradual process.One of your main goals
is to develop the trust and conÞdence of your employees, both
in their own abilities and in their opinion of you. They must
have conÞdence that you are competent at your job and that you
are fair.
The Success Habit
Building conÞdence in employees is not an easy task. Do you
believe success is habit forming? ConÞdence is built on success,
so give your people horses they can ride. Especially in dealing
with new employees, assign them tasks they can master. Build
in them the habit of being successful, starting small with small
successes.
Occasionally a team member will perform a task incorrectly
or just plain blow it. How you handle these situations has a great
impact on the conÞdence of employees. Never correct them in
front of others. According to the old credo,ÔÔPraise in public,
criticize in private.ÕÕThe adage still has a lot of management
truth in it.
PAGE 15
15
.................11066$$CH3 11-23-04 15:24:04 PS
16So You're Going to Manage People
Even when you talk to a team member in private about an
error, your function is to train that person to recognize the na-
ture of the problem so as not to make the same error again. Your
attitude about errors will speak louder to an employee than the
words you use. Your statements must be directed toward cor-
recting the misunderstanding that led to the error and not
toward personal judgment. Never say or do anything that will
make the employee feel inadequate. You want to build conÞ-
dence, not destroy it. If you get pleasure from making team
members feel foolish, then you
Õ
d better start examining your
own motives, because you can
Õ
t build yourself up by tearing
someone else down. Examine the error based on what went
wrong, where the misunderstanding occurred, and go on from
there. Treat the small error routinely; donÕt make it bigger than
it really is.
Let
Õ
s brie
ß
y discuss theÔÔpraise in publicÕÕpart of the old
credo. This concept used to be taken as gospel until managers
found that it too could also create problems. The individual on
the receiving end of the praise felt warm and fuzzy about the
compliment, but others who were not equally commended re-
acted negatively. The disappointment was then directed at the
employee who was praised. That is why it is important to be
cautious about praising in public. Why make life tougher for
that employee by creating jealousy or resentment in the people
he or she must work with eight hours a day? If you really want
to praise someone expansively for outstanding performance, do
it in the privacy of your of
Þ
ce. You
Õ
ll get the pluses without the
negatives of resentment and jealousy from coworkers. On the
other hand, if you have a group that works well together, re-
spects the efforts of each member of the team, and they are ac-
complishing their goals, praising in public will be a morale
booster for the entire team.
For now, let
Õ
s amend the old credo to read:ÔÔPraise in public
or private (depending on the preference of the individual and
the dynamics of your team), criticize in private.ÕÕ
You can also build con
Þ
dence by involving your people in
some of the decision-making processes. Without delegating any
of your supervisory responsibilities to them, allow them to have
some major input into matters that affect them. A new task
PAGE 16.................11066$$CH3 11-23-04 15:24:04 PS
Building Trust and ConÞdence17
about to be performed in your area presents the opportunity to
give your subordinates some input. Solicit ideas from them on
how the new task might best be worked into the daily routine.
Given this kind of participation, the new routine will succeed
because it is everyone
Õ
s routine, not just yours. This doesnÕt
mean your staff is making decisions for you; what IÕm suggest-
ing is that by involving your people in the process that leads up
to your decision, youÕll have them working with you rather than
accepting new systems imposed on them.
The Evils of Perfectionism
Some managers expect perfection from their employees. They
know they wonÕt get it but they feel theyÕll get closer to it by
demanding it. By insisting on perfection, you may in fact defeat
your own purposes. Some employees will become so self-con-
scious about making a mistake that they slow their performance
down to a crawl to make absolutely certain they don
Õ
t screw
up. As a result, production goes way down and employees lose
con
Þ
dence.
Another drawback to being a perfectionist is that everyone
resents you for it. Your direct reports believe you are impossible
to please and you prove it to them every day. This also shatters
employee con
Þ
dence. You know what the acceptable standards
for work performance are in your company
Ñ
no one can blame
you for wanting to be better than the average
Ñ
but you
Õ
ll have
far more success if you get the employees involved in helping
decide how to improve performance. If it is their plan, you have
a signi
Þ
cantly better chance of achieving your goal.
You can also build conÞdence by developing esprit de corps
within your own area. Make sure, however, that the feeling you
build is supportive of the prevailing company spirit and not in
competition with it.
The Importance of Building Trust
In addition to allowing mistakes and helping individuals see
their errors, giving praise and recognition, involving others in
PAGE 17.................11066$$CH3 11-23-04 15:24:04 PS
18So You're Going to Manage People
the decision-making process, and avoiding perfectionism, you,
the manager, can build trust in many other ways.
You can share the vision of the organization and the de-
partment with your team members. Doing this gives them
a clearer picture of what the goals are and how they are
helping in meeting them.
You can give individuals clear directions. That shows
them that you know what you are doing and are keeping
things on track.
You can share examples of how you have succeeded and
what mistakes you have made. Doing that makes you real
to your team.
You can talk to each of your team members to learn what
each one wants from the job. By doing this, you are dem-
onstrating that you really care.
All of these additional strategies can build a trusting envi-
ronment. Think of some others not mentioned here that you
could do in your work environment.
PAGE 18.................11066$$CH3 11-23-04 15:24:05 PS
4
Show Your Appreciation
In the last chapter,the importance of giving positive feedback or
praise is brießy mentioned. It is the best method for motivating
individuals and building a positive work environment. Many
managers do not give their direct reports praise, which is a big
mistake. Praise lets employees know that you care about what
they are doing. It also lets employees know that their work is
important. If you think about it, it probably takes only seconds
to give someone praise and it does not cost a thing! It does have
a big impact on most employees though. You can praise people
face-to-face, over the telephone, or via e-mail. Face-to-face is al-
ways the best method for giving feedback. But if you have em-
ployees in other locations or cannot get to them in a timely
manner, use the telephone or send e-mail.
Many managers might not show their appreciation because
they never had appreciation shown to them by others. You
should stop that cycle. Show appreciation. Some managers feel
that employees are supposed to perform well because they are
getting paid to do well, so there is no reason to praise them for
doing so. This is not good reasoning. Those managers should
bear in mind that if they praised their employees, they might
perform even better. Considering it costs nothing and is real
quick, why not do it?
There are many managers, especially newer ones, who are
PAGE 19
19
.................11066$$CH4 11-23-04 15:24:07 PS
20So You're Going to Manage People
uncomfortable giving praise. It is a new skill for them. This is to
be expected. In order to become more comfortable expressing
appreciation, you have to do it. The more you practice it the
easier it will become. Consider some of the following points
when giving praise or showing appreciation:
Be speciÞc.If managers want certain behaviors repeated,
they need to be speciÞc in the type of positive feedback they
give. The more detailed the manager is, the more likely the be-
havior or action will be repeated.
Describe the impact. Most team members like to know how
their work ties into the bigger picture or the larger scheme of
things such as meeting the objectives of the unit, department, or
organization.
Do not overdo it. Many managers go to extremes when they
give positive feedback. They give their team members too much
positive feedback. When this occurs, the impact of the important
feedback is diminished and the praise may seem insincere.
The Actual Skill
Giving praise or appreciation involves two steps. First, you spe-
ci
Þ
cally describe the behavior, action, or performance that de-
serves the appreciation. For example,ÔÔI like the new design for
the cover of our products catalog.
ÕÕThen you describe why it
deserves your appreciation (the business impact). For example,
ÔÔThe new design is bound to greatly increase sales.ÕÕ
Remember, do not be stingy with your appreciation.
You should even give praise to your managers when (on
those rare occasions) they deserve it! After all, they are people
too and like most people would appreciate positive feedback.
To underscore this point, at a group of thirty attendees in a
management seminar, the following two questions were asked:
1. What is the best example of enlightened management
you
Õ
ve ever seen?
PAGE 20.................11066$$CH4 11-23-04 15:24:07 PS
Show Your Appreciation21
2. What is the worst example of management youÕve expe-
rienced?
It was no surprise that nearly all the responses had to do
with some form of appreciation either received or denied when
the staff member felt it was deserved. What was surprising was
the depth of emotion displayed about the subject.
One answer was a classic: A young man recounted how he
was asked to get in a pickup truck and driveÞfty miles to an
outlying facility to make an important repair. At 10:30p.m., after
he had just returned home, the phone rang. It was his manager.
ÕÕ
I just called to make sure that you got home okay. It
Õ
s kind of
a bad night out there.
ÔÔThe manager did not even ask about how
the repair went, which indicated his complete con
Þ
dence in the
young man
Õ
s ability. The manager inquired only about his safe
return. The incident had taken place more thanÞve years earlier,
but to the young worker, it was as fresh as though it had hap-
pened last night.
In a poll conducted by one of the United StatesÕmajor com-
panies, employees were asked to rank work attributes they con-
sidered important. Salary came in sixth. What came inÞrst, by a
wide margin, wasÔÔa need to be appreciated for what I do.ÕÕ
If appreciation is important to you in your relationship with
your manager, realize that it is equally important to the people
you manage. When people deserve appreciation, do not with-
hold it. It does not cost a single dollar, but it is so much more
valuable than money.
PAGE 21.................11066$$CH4 11-23-04 15:24:07 PS
5
Being an Active Listener
One of the best-kept secrets of successful managementis the
ability to listen actively. Active listening means letting the other
person know that they have been listened to. You do this by
involving yourself in the conversation, making clarifying state-
ments, asking questions, summarizing what you have heard,
and using appropriate visual and vocal cues. The best listeners
are active ones. New managers should be concerned about their
ability to communicate and listen actively. Many new managers
have the mistaken idea that the minute they are promoted every-
one is going to hang on to every word they say. They set out to
Þll that need. That is the wrong approach. These managers
should remember they have two ears and one mouth; therefore,
they ought to do twice as much listening as talking.
Active listening is one of the most valuable traits that a new
manager can demonstrate for two important reasons: First, if
you do a great deal of active listening, you will not be thought
of as a know-it-all, which is how most people perceive someone
who talks too much. Second, by doing a lot of active listening
and little talking, youÕll learn what is going on. YouÕll learn none
of it by doing all the talking.
Most people are not good active listeners, and we ought to
examine the reason why not.
PAGE 22
22
.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:10 PS
Being an Active Listener23
The Poor Listener
Many people believe that the most beautiful sound in the world
is their own voice. It is music to their ears. They cannot get
enough of it, so they require others to listen to it. Typically, these
people are more interested in what they are going to say them-
selves than in what others are saying. Indeed, most people can
remember nearly everything they have said and hardly any of
what the other person has said. People listen partially. They are
not being active listeners. They are too busy thinking of the
clever things they are going to utter.
If you don't remember anything else about this chapter,
you
'
ll do yourself immeasurable good by recalling this state-
ment: If you want to be thought of as a brilliant manager, be an
active listener.
Many managers, both new and not so new, do too much
talking and not enough listening. You learn very little while you
are talking, but you can learn a great deal while listening. New
managers often think now that they are in charge, everyone is
hanging on to every word. The more you talk, the more you run
the risk of boring others. The more you listen, the more you
learn. It seems like an obvious choice, especially for a manager
of people.
Another reason people are not good listeners is the compre-
hension gap. Most people communicate at between 80 and 120
words per minute. Let's assume 100 words per minute as the
average speaking speed. People can comprehend at a much
higher rate. Those who have taken a rapid reading course, and
who maintain the skill, can comprehend well over 1,000 words
per minute. If someone is speaking at 100 words per minute to
a listener who can comprehend at 1,000 words per minute, there
is a 900-word-per-minute comprehension gap. A speaking speed
of 100 words per minute doesn't demand our full attention, so
we tune out the speaker. We think of other things, and periodi-
cally we check back in with the speaker to see if anything inter-
esting is going on. If we become more interested in what we are
thinking of than in what the speaker is saying, it may be quite a
while before we tune back in to what the person is saying.
PAGE 23.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:10 PS
24So Youíre Going to Manage People
Everyone has a need to be listened to. What a wonderful
service we provide, therefore, if we are great active listeners. The
manager who is a great active listenerfills an important need for
every employee on the staff.
TheActiveListener
Active listeners possess several traits and skills, all of which can
be developed over time. For one thing, they encourage the other
person to talk. When listenersfinally talk, they don't turn the
conversation back to themselves. They continue the other per-
son
'
s line of communication. They use certain phrases or ges-
tures to signal to the talker that they are truly interested in what
he or she has to say.
Looking at someone who is talking to you indicates that
you
'
re interested in what the person has to say
 - 
that, in fact,
you are hanging on every word. Nodding your head affirma-
tively occasionally indicates that you understand what the talker
is saying. Smiling at the same time indicates that you are enjoy-
ing the conversation.
When discussing a problem with an employee, other
thoughts are likely to enter your mind. You need to take control
of those thoughts. While the person is discussing the problem,
try to anticipate where the thought is going. What questions are
likely to be asked? If someone is suggesting solutions to a prob-
lem, try to think of other solutions. Ideally, you should focus 100
percent on what the person is saying, but the comprehension
gap is a reality. By controlling your stray thoughts, you can stay
focused on the subject at hand, rather than on some extraneous
idea that will be distracting.
A well-placed comment also indicates to the talker that you
have a genuine interest in what he or she has to say.
''That's interesting.''
''Tell me more.''
''Why do you suppose she said that?''
''Why did you feel that way?''
PAGE 24.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:10 PS
Being an Active Listener25
In fact, just saying,ÔÔThatÕs interesting. Tell me more,ÕÕwill
make you a brilliant conversationalist in the minds of everyone
with whom you come in contact.
Being an active listener also means that all three forms of
communication are in accord. That means that the words you
use, your facial expressions, and your voice tone or expression
all give the same meaning. The speaker will receive a confusing
message if you say,ÔÔThatÕs interesting. Tell me more,ÕÕbut have
a frown on your face or are speaking in a sarcastic tone. Another
mixed message is to respond well verbally but look away from
the speaker or become distracted by a document. Would you
have con
Þ
dence that this listener was really interested in what
you were saying?
Conversation Terminators
Once a manager achieves a reputation for being an outstanding
listener, the staff lines up to discuss many matters. Some will
overstay their welcome. They may even think talking to you
beats working. You need to have some tools in your managerial
toolbox to wind up these conversations.
The verbal conversational terminators are known to just
about anyone who has held a job.
ÔÔI appreciate your coming in.ÕÕ
ÔÔIt was nice talking to you.ÕÕ
ÔÔ
Let me think about that a while and get back to you.ÕÕ
There are also some more subtle conversation terminators
that you may have seen. You should be aware of them for two
reasons:Þrst, so that you can immediately recognize them when
a more experienced executive uses them on you, and second, so
you can use them when they seem appropriate.
If you
Õ
ve ever had a conversation in someone
Õ
sofÞce and,
while you
Õ
re talking, watched your host reach over and rest a
hand on the telephone receiver even though the telephone hasnÕt
rung, that
Õ
s a conversation terminator. It says,ÔÔAs soon as you
PAGE 25.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:10 PS
26So Youíre Going to Manage People
leave, I'm going to make a phone call.''Another technique is for
the person to pick up a piece of paper from the desk and glance
at it periodically during your conversation. By holding the paper
in his hand, your host is saying,''I have something to take care
of as soon as you depart.''
Another conversation terminator is the one where the host
turns in his chair behind the desk to a side position as though
about to get up. If that doesn't work, he stands up. That always
gets the message across. This approach may seem too direct, but
sometimes it becomes necessary.
Occasionally, you
'
ll have an employee who is having such
a good time visiting with you that all the signals are ignored. In
that case, a verbal terminator that always works is,''I have really
enjoyed the conversation, but I have work to do, and I'm sure
you do, too.
''That is not rude for someone who has ignored all
other invitations to depart.
When an employee or colleague comes into your of
fi
ce who
you know in advance is not going to pick up any of your signals,
you can announce at the beginning that you have only a limited
amount of time (which is probably true) and if that is not
enough time, then the two of you will need to meet later on. You
willfind this strategy works quite well. Your visitors will say
what they need to within the allotted time frame.
It is important that you recognize these conversation termi-
nators. Of course, you should try to keep your conversations
meaningful enough to preclude their use on you and your use
of them on others. There are many more, but you
'
ll compile your
own list andfind that different people have their own favorite
conversation terminators.
Listening Summary
People enjoy being around someone who shows a genuine inter-
est in them. Good listening skills carry over into many aspects
of both your professional and personal life. The interesting thing
is that you can start out using these techniques because you real-
ize people will like being with you. There is nothing wrong with
PAGE 26.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:11 PS
Being an Active Listener27
this attitude. You become well liked and your team members get
a manager who makes them feel good about themselves.
Everyone gains from such an arrangement. You may need to
work hard on your active listening skills, but eventually they
Õ
ll
become second nature. AtÞrst, you may consider this type of
behavior to be role-playing. But after a while youÕll be unable to
tell when the role-playing has stopped and itÕs actually you.
What happens is that after practicing these new listening habits,
you become very comfortable with them and they become part
of your regular behavior. YouÕll derive a great deal of personal
satisfaction from being the kind of person others enjoy being
around. YouÕll also be a much more effective manager.
PAGE 27.................11066$$CH5 11-23-04 15:24:11 PS
6
The New ManagerÕsJob
and Pitfalls to Avoid
So what is the managerÕs job really?There are so many ways to
answer that question but the most helpful is to look at manage-
ment much the same as an actor would. As a manager you need
to play many rolesÑcoach, setter of standards, performance ap-
praiser, teacher, motivator, and so forth. You select the appro-
priate role based on the situation you are in and the objectives
that you want to accomplish. Often, new managers are given the
advice toÔÔjust be yourself.ÕÕThis is actually bad advice. It will
prevent you from using the different roles that will make you a
successful and effective manager.
Another mistake that many new managers make is believ-
ing that their role is to be directive; that is, to tell others what to
do, how to do it, and make sure it gets done. This may be part
of the job or necessary to do sometimes. However, what enables
you and your employees to succeed in the long run is getting
your employees to become self-directed. This means that you
must get their support and commitment, share power with
them, and remove as many obstacles to their success as possible.
The ManagerÕs Major Responsibilities
Most management experts would agree that managers have cer-
tain main responsibilities no matter where they work or who
PAGE 28
28
.................11066$$CH6 11-23-04 15:24:13 PS
The New ManagerÕs Job and Pitfalls to Avoid29
works for them. These main responsibilities include hiring, com-
municating, planning, organizing, training, and monitoring. The
better and more comfortable you become with these responsibil-
ities the easier the job of managing becomes. These six responsi-
bilities are addressed throughout the book, but letÕsdeÞne them
here:
1.HiringisÞnding individuals with the skills or potential
skills and commitment and con
Þ
dence to succeed on the
job.
2.Communicatingis sharing the vision and goals and objec-
tives of the organizations with your employees. It also
means sharing information about what is happening in
your department, unit, group, or business community.
3.Planningis deciding what work needs to be done to meet
the goals of your department that, in turn, meets the
goals of the organization.
4.Organizingis determining the resources that are needed
to perform each job or project and deciding which staff
members do what.
5.Trainingis assessing the skill level of each one of your
employees to determine their gaps, and then providing
opportunities for them to close these gaps.
6.Monitoringis making sure that the work is being done
and that each of your employees is succeeding on their
projects and assignments.
Genuine Concern
One way to perform your job well is to give full attention to the
needs of the people in your area of responsibility. Some leaders
make the mistake of thinking that the concern they show for
their employees will be interpreted as a sign of weakness. Genu-
ine concern, however, is a sign of strength. Showing interest in
the welfare of your people doesnÕt mean youÕllÔÔcave inÕÕto un-
reasonable demands. Unfortunately, many new managers fail
PAGE 29.................11066$$CH6 11-23-04 15:24:13 PS
30So Youíre Going to Manage People
to recognize this fact. They are unable to differentiate between
concern and weakness.
Your concern must be genuine. You cannot fake it. Genuine
concern means seeing that your people are properly challenged,
and that they
'
re appropriately rewarded when they perform
well.
You can
'
t start off by complacently telling yourself,''I'm
going to be Mr. Nice Guy.
''You must seriously take on the bur-
den of responsibility for these people. In fact, you and your team
are mutually responsible to one another. Your team members
now look to you for leadership. You must see to it that the objec-
tives of the company and the objectives of your team members
are not at cross-purposes. Your people should realize that they
can achieve their own objectives only by doing their part in help-
ing the company achieve its overall goals.
The person they look to for leadership is you. You serve as
interpreter for the employees. What is the company's policy?
You must be certain that you know what it is!
Pitfalls to Avoid
Mostfirst-time managers do not supervise a large group of peo-
ple. Therefore, there may be a temptation to become overly in-
volved in the work of your six or seven people. As you move up
the corporate ladder, you will be responsible for more and more
workers. It is impossible to be involved in the detail work of
thirty-
fi
ve people, so begin now to distance yourself from the
details of each task and concentrate on the overall project.
One of the dangers for afirst-time manager is that you now
may be managing someone who does your old job, and you may
consider it more important than tasks you did not perform. It is
human nature to think that what we do is more important than
what others do, but that doesn't work when you're the manager.
It is not a balanced approach to management. You must resist
the temptation to make your old job your occupational hobby,
simply because it is familiar and comfortable.
Often, yourfirst managerial job is a project leader or lead
PAGE 30.................11066$$CH6 11-23-04 15:24:14 PS
The New ManagerÕs Job and Pitfalls to Avoid31
position. You manage others, but you still have tasks of your
own to perform; you wear two hats. If this is your situation, you
must stay interested and involved in the details for a while.
When you move into a full-time management position, however,
don
'
t take an occupational hobby with you, lest it distract you
from the bigger picture.
Of course, don
'
t carry this advice to the extreme. When
some people move into management, they refuse to help their
staff at a''crunch and crisis''time. They read management jour-
nals while their staff is frantically meeting deadlines; they are
now''in management.''That is just plain stupid. You can build
great rapport with your staff if, at crunch time, you roll up your
sleeves and help resolve the crisis.
A Balanced Viewpoint
In all management matters, maintain a sense of balance. You
have undoubtedly encountered managers who say,''I'm a big-
picture guy; don
'
t bother me with the details.
''Unfortunately,
this trait is true of many managers. They become so big-picture-
oriented that they are oblivious to the details that bring the pic-
ture together. They also may be insensitive to how much effort
is required to complete the detailed work.
Other managers, including manyfirst-time managers who
have been promoted from a line position, are so enthralled with
detail that the overall objective is lost. It is a case of not being
able to see the forest for the trees. Balance is required.
PAGE 31.................11066$$CH6 11-23-04 15:24:14 PS
7
Dealing with
Your Superiors
Chapter 6 discussed a managerÕs attitudetoward his or her em-
ployees. It is also important for managers to pay attention to
their attitude toward superiors. Their future success depends on
both their subordinates and superiors.
If youÕve just had a big promotion, youÕre feeling grateful
to your boss. You are also pleased that the top executive was
perceptive enough to recognize your talent. But your new re-
sponsibility demands a new level of loyalty from you. After all,
you are now a part of the management team. You canÕt be a good
team member without identifying with the team.
Remember, however, that someone who is your superior in
the company isnÕt necessarily smarter than you. Your boss may
be more experienced than you, may have been with the company
longer, or may be in the top position for other reasons. It is also
possible, however, that your boss performed exceedingly well
and is indeed smarter than you.
Loyalty to Them
Loyalty has fallen into widespread disrepute. Blind loyalty has
never had much to recommend it, but being loyal doesnÕt mean
PAGE 32
32
.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:17 PS
Dealing with Your Superiors33
selling your soul. Your company and your boss are not out to
rip off the world. If they are, they
Õ
re not worth your loyalty.
More important, you shouldn
Õ
t be working for them.
So let
Õ
s assume you
Õ
re convinced that your company
Õ
s pur-
pose is commendable and you
Õ
re pleased to be associated with
its goals. The kind of loyalty weÕre talking about has to do with
carrying out policies or decisions you morally support. Let
Õ
s as-
sume your position with the company allows for some input
into decisions having to do with your area of responsibility. You
must make every effort to see that such input is as thoughtful
and as broadly based as possible. Don
Õ
t be the kind of narrow-
sighted manager whose recommendations are designed to bene-
Þ
t only his or her own area of responsibility. When this happens,
your advice will no longer be sought because it is not broad-
based.
If you make recommendations that are broadly based and
represent the greater good of the company, your advice will be
sought more often. The important thing here is that your
involvement in the decision-making process can be beyond your
own managerial level.
On occasion, a decision or policy will be made that is di-
rectly contrary to the opinions you
Õ
ve expressed; you
Õ
ll be ex-
pected to support that decision or policy, and you may even have
to implement it. Ask your boss why the decision was made, if
you don
Õ
t already know. Find out what important considera-
tions went into formulating the policy. Determine what you can
about the processes that led to the decision.
The old philosophy of following the leader blindly no
longer holds in today
Õ
s management circles. Nonetheless, many
managers and senior executives doubtless wish blind loyalty
still existed.
If you are going to do an outstanding job of managing, you
have a right to understand the reasons behind major company
decisions and company policy. Perhaps your own manager is
one who follows higher authority blindly and guards informa-
tion about top management as if all of it were top secretÑand
you
Õ
re the enemy. In that case, you may need to be more politi-
cal in how you go about getting the answers to your questions.
If it is a policy that affects other departments, you canÞnd
PAGE 33.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:17 PS
34So Youíre Going to Manage People
out from people at your own organizational level in those de-
partments. If a friend in Department X has a boss who shares
information freely with employees, it may be relatively simple
toÞnd out what you want to know over a cup of coffee with
your friend.
You Have a Responsibility
When working and communicating with your manager, you
have many responsibilities in building a good relationship with
this person. You need to do the following:
Keep your manager informed of your plans, actions, and
projects.
Be considerate of your managerÕs time and try to schedule
appointments or meetings at your managerÕs conve-
nience.
Present your arguments and concerns logically and objec-
tively and have examples and facts to back up what you
are saying.
Be willing to listen to your managerÕs point of view. Your
manager might be right!
Dealing with an Unreasonable Manager
We do not live in a perfect world. As a result, at some time in
your career, you may be in the uncomfortable position of report-
ing to a dif
Þ
cult manager
Ñ
someone who is not doing a good
job of managing and/or may be unpleasant to be around. Unfor-
tunately, you cannotÞre an incompetent or unreasonable boss,
as pleasant as that prospect might be.
Let
Õ
s be candid. If a long-term manager is difÞcult, you have
to wonder why the situation is allowed to exist. If everyone in
the organization knows this person is miserable to work for,
why does top management allow the situation to continue?
On the other hand, if everyone else in the department thinks
PAGE 34.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:17 PS
Dealing with Your Superiors35
the manager is doing a great job and youÕre the only one having
a problem, it
Õ
s a far different situation. If you are new to the
department, you might give it some time by not reacting too
quickly. The problem may resolve itself if you do a great job and
are not hypersensitive. You mayÞnd it is style and not sub-
stance.
If your manager is really causing problems for you or your
direct reports, however, you de
Þ
nitely need to do something
about it. You do have some viable choices. Depending on the
political environment and culture of your organization, different
strategies may work better. Right off the bat, you should try to
communicate directly with your boss. Tell him or her what is
up. Explain in a professional manner how your managerÕs be-
haviors, policies, or actions are having a bottom line business
impact. For example, suppose your manager is giving different
instructions to the staff than you are. This is causing shipping
delays and customer complaints
Ñ
bottom-line concerns. Even if
he or she doesn
Õ
t like hearing it, your boss should appreciate
your directness in pointing out this problem.
Often bosses do not realize that they may be doing some-
thing inappropriate. They need the feedback. You should always
try to meet with your boss on a regular basis to discuss any
issues that need addressing. If your manager doesnÕt think these
meetings are necessary, you should insist. Try to explain how
constant communication will prevent problems from springing
up and how you would both beneÞt from this undertaking.
On another note, I always advise new managers that if a
mentor is not assigned to them, they shouldÞnd one on their
own. You need someone within the organization who is well
respected and aware of the political goings-on. You need some-
one who can take you under his or her wing and teach you
about organizational life.
Now, letÕs say you have the type of boss who does not like
to get feedback from employees. So what do you do now? Here
is where understanding the politics and culture of your organi-
zation comes in and where your mentor can be of great assis-
tance. You may need to get someone else to speak to your boss.
It could be someone on his or her level, a mutual friend who you
have in the organization, human resources
Ñ
if their reputation
PAGE 35.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:18 PS
36So Youíre Going to Manage People
is good and they play fair
 - 
or you may have to take the biggest
risk of all and jump levels to have that person
'
s boss speak to
him or her. Keep in mind that when you do this, you probably
will sever your relationship with your boss forever. But you may
have no other choice. You are undertaking this action for your
team or the overall bene
fi
t to the organization.
You do have onefinal option. You may have to say to your-
self:''The boss is difficult. She has been difficult for many years;
no one seems to care or is willing to change her behavior. This
may not be the best place for me since my boss has a great in
fl
u-
ence on my success. Perhaps I need tofind a position in another
department or within another organization.
''
Driving Good People Away
It is true that there are many companies that take advantage of
a downturn in the economy to drive their people harder, recog-
nizing that it
'
s more dif
fi
cult for people to leave. There are rea-
sons why such an attitude is shortsighted. First, top-flight
people can alwaysfind other jobs, no matter how tough the
economy. The lesser talented people are the ones who cannot.
So, this maladjusted company attitude drives away the more tal-
ented and retains the less talented. That is a recipe for medioc-
rity. Second, in a tough economy, appreciating all of your staff,
including the very talented managers, places the organization in
a stronger position to compete effectively. A company with a
talented and appreciated staff will beat the brains out of a com-
pany that treats its employees merely as units of production.
The long-range prospects for the latter style are not good.
One of the surest ways to eventually drive good people
from your company is to perpetuate bad management. This may
sound obvious, but many new managers can't wait to start treat-
ing their people the way they
'
ve been treated. They may be
taught the more humane management approach, but they go
with what they know. They are anxious to take their turn''dish-
ing it out''after all these years of''taking it.''
The lesson of the unreasonable boss is to be the kind of
leader you wish you had, not to carry on the tradition. Do not
PAGE 36.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:18 PS
Dealing with Your Superiors37
adopt a management style you hate and get even with people
who had nothing to do with your mistreatment. If youÕre work-
ing for an unreasonable boss, do humanity a favor and say,ÔÔLet
it end with me.ÕÕ
Knowing Your Managerís Personality Style
There have been countless books and articles written on the topic
of managing your boss. The main premise of all these writings
is the same: If you know the personality style of your manager,
you will be able to manage this person by knowing what your
manager needs and wants and how your manager likes to work
and communicate. If you can manage this person, you will have
fewer problems with him or her.
There are four basic personality types that managers have.
Some managers have a distinct personality style while others are
combinations of two or three styles. Read the descriptions that
follow and see if you canÞgure out your managerÕs style. If you
can, you will be more successful working with your manager.
The Monopolizers
They like to be in charge of everything. These managers are fast
decision makers who stick to their decisions, are very organized,
and are bottom-line oriented. They areÔÔmy way or the high-
wayÕÕtypes. If they were doing target practice, their saying
would beÔÔready,Þre, aimÕÕ(as opposed to the usual saying of
ÔÔ
ready, aim,ÞreÕÕ). If you work for monopolizers, make sure
you are clear and direct with your communication, have all your
facts ready, and be prepared to do what they say.
The Methodicals
They are your analytic types. These managers like to take their
time gathering information and data before making a decision.
They are very steady and predictable and overly concerned with
accuracy. If they were doing target practice, their saying would
beÔÔaim, aim, aim.ÕÕThey hate to make decisions and are always
looking for more or different information. If you work for me-
PAGE 37.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:18 PS
38So You're Going to Manage People
thodicals, be patient! Realize that they are trying to make the
best decision based on all data. When you give your opinion or
your suggestion, make sure that you have analyzed it carefully
and can explain your reasoning and logic to them.
The Motivators
These are the superiors who are fun to be around. They are char-
ismatic and seem to have good relationships with everyone in
the organization. They have high energy, are creative, and have
a competitive spirit. However, they often talk more than they do.
They like to get things started, but completing them is another
story. If they were doing target practice, their saying would be
''
talk, talk, talk.
''They just love to talk and have fun and some-
times the work gets the backseat. When communicating with
Motivators, make sure to do a lot of chitchatting. Ask them how
their weekend was, how the kids are, and so forth. Before they
can get down to business, they need to socialize.
The Mixers
You probably have a relaxed and laid-back work environment if
your superior is a Mixer. Mixers have a strong sense of dedica-
tion, are loyal team members, patient, sympathetic, understand-
ing, dependable, and great at keeping the peace. Their Achilles
heel is that they shy away from conflict. They do not like change.
They favor the status quo. They may also be more concerned
with how people are doing than getting the work out. If they
were doing target practice, their saying would be''ready, ready,
ready.
''They are always there for you. The needs of others come
before their own. When working with Mixers, put on your feel-
ings and teamwork hat. You will need it!
PAGE 38.................11066$$CH7 11-23-04 15:24:19 PS
8
Choosing a Managerial
Style of Your Own
If you look at the history of management stylein the United
States, youÕll notice that two styles have dominated. Managers
were either autocratic or diplomatic. Today, however, the best
managers know that there are more than two styles of managing
and they need to be good in all the styles. Before discussing the
necessity of having an alert managerial style, letÕs look at the
autocratic and diplomatic styles.
The Autocrat vs. the Diplomat
It is difÞcult to believe that we still see the old-fashioned auto-
crat in management today. You have to wonder why this is so.
Partly it has to do with the fact that so many managers are given
no training. They are left toÞnd their own way, so they begin
acting as they think they should. They think in terms of being a
ÔÔboss.ÕÕAutocrats also believe that if they take the softer ap-
proach, employees will take advantage. It is as though the softer
approach will be seen as a sign of weakness.
Another possibility is that it takes more time to be a diplo-
matic manager. These managers spend time with people ex-
PAGE 39
39
.................11066$$CH8 11-23-04 15:24:21 PS
40So Youre Going to Manage People
plaining not onlywhatis to be done but alsowhyit's done. The
boss type doesn
'
t want to be bothered. This person
'
s attitude is
''Do it because I said so.''The diplomat realizes that the more
people understand of what and why, the better they perform.
The autocrat wants to make every decision and views the
staff as making robotic responses to his or her commands. The
autocrat pushes the buttons, the staff snaps to, and it happens.
The diplomat knows that the time spent up front, getting every-
body involved, pays off with huge dividends down the road.
The autocrat engenders fear while the diplomat builds re-
spect and even affection. The autocrat causes people to mutter
under their breath,''Someday, I'll get even with this SOB.''The
diplomat causes people to say,''He respects us and cares for us.
I
'
d walk the last mile for him. All he needs to do is ask.''
The autocrat believes the diplomat is a wimp. The diplomat
believes the autocrat is a dictator. The difference is that the auto-
crat uses authority constantly, while the diplomat is judicious in
its display.
People working for the autocrat believe they are working
forsomeone. Those reporting to the diplomat believe they are
workingwithsomeone.
The Need for Alertness
As a new manager, you should use the''alertness approach''
when selecting an appropriate managerial style. In order to be
alert,you must use the right amount ofcontrolandencouragement
for each of your employees. Control is telling employees what
to do, showing them how to do it, and making sure that the
work is done. Encouragement is motivating, listening to, and
running interference so employees can do what they are ex-
pected to do.
Some employees need high amounts of control and encour-
agement. Others need little control or encouragement. Then
there are others who fall somewhere in between. In order to use
the alertness approach in selecting a managerial style, you have
to determine what each of your employees needs from you. That
PAGE 40.................11066$$CH8 11-23-04 15:24:22 PS
Choosing a Managerial Style of Your Own41
is, how much control and/or encouragement do they need from
you?
The amount of control or encouragement each employee re-
quires will depend on what he or she is working on or what is
occurring in the department. For example, if an employee needs
to learn how to operate a new piece of equipment, he or she will
need a lot of control. If there are talks of downsizing and cutting
back throughout the company, your team members will need
much encouragement.
The following descriptions will help you see the connection
between what your staff needs from you and how much control
and/or encouragement you give them; in other words, are you
being alert to their needs?
Type A.This is someone who is very motivated to do well
but lacks the skill or knowledge to succeed. Being alert, you
know this person needs mostly control from you.
Type B.This is someone who has lost his or her motivation
but has the skills to do the job. Being alert, you know this person
needs lots of encouragement.
Type C.This is someone who performs very well and is
also motivated. Being alert, you know this person needs little
control and encouragement.
Type D.This is someone who lacks both ability and will-
ingness to perform. Being alert, you know this person
 - 
besides
a good kick (which, of course you cannot do) - needs lots of con-
trol and encouragement.
Type E.This is someone who has medium amounts of skill
and motivation. Being alert, you know this person obviously
needs medium amounts of control and encouragement.
Let
'
s look at a workplace scenario and see how alert you
can be. Suppose you are heading a large independent project at
a telecommunications company. One of the employees assigned
to you, Andy, is used to working independently on his assign-
ments. Andy likes calling all the shots and really enjoys his
work. He always gets excellent results and his internal clients
are thrilled with his work. Working on your project, you notice
PAGE 41.................11066$$CH8 11-23-04 15:24:22 PS
42So You're Going to Manage People
that heÞnds it challenging to plan and communicate and make
decisions with the other team members. In addition, Andy has
put down the whole team concept and says it is a waste of time.
He has expressed his unhappiness with being on this new
project.
Being alert, what type (A to E) is Andy and what does he
need from you as his manager? The answer: Even though Andy
is an experienced employee in his regular work, this is not true
on your project. Andy needs control and encouragement. He
needs guidance in how to work with others in a team environ-
ment and support for this difÞcult transition he is making.
Andy
Õ
s type is D for this project, although he is probably an A
type on his own assignments.
Here is a suggestion that will make managing much easier
for you. Call itÔÔdrive time.ÕÕOn the way to work, think about
all your direct reports every few days. Think about what their
type is on all the different assignments and projects that you
have them doing. Then be alert. Think about what they need
from you. If you are already giving it to them, you have the
perfect scenario. If you are not, decide what you need to do dif-
ferently. You
Õ
llÞnd this one suggestion will make a huge differ-
ence for you as a manager. Try it.
PAGE 42.................11066$$CH8 11-23-04 15:24:23 PS
9
Building Team Spirit
In recent years,getting work done through teams has become
standard practice in many organizations. This is true for a cou-
ple of reasons. One reason is synergy. Generally, it has been
proved in workplaces that groups make better decisions than
any individual working has alone. Another reason for having
teams is that in todayÕs world of high technology the manager
can not know as much as all of the employees. The manager can
no longer be the expert. In manyÞelds and occupations today,
managers have people working for them who know more than
they do. It is no longer possible in these instances to tell people
what to do. The manager needs to support and guide employees
and let them come up with the work-related answers.
If you really want your team to succeed and perform at the
highest levels possible, you need to build team spirit. Team spirit
is the willingness and the ability to work in an interdependent
fashion where any team member needs to rely on other team
members to accomplish his or her work or to achieve the goals
of the team. In order to build a team spirit, the followingÞve
factors are essential:
1. Open communication
2. Empowerment
3. Clear roles and responsibilities
PAGE 43
43
.................11066$$CH9 11-23-04 15:24:24 PS
44So You're Going to Manage People
4. An effective leader
5. A reward and accountability system for both individual
team members and the entire team
Open Communication
Consider this scenario: A young manager-to-be accompanied his
mentor, an experienced manager, to observe a high-performing
team in operation at a manufacturing company. When heÞrst
walked into the room, he said to his mentor,ÔÔOh boy, this is a
dysfunctional team! Listen to the way they are arguing with each
other.
ÕÕThe older man replied,ÔÔPay attention, you are witness-
ing a great team.
ÕÕ
It took the younger man several minutes to understand
what the manager meant. This team was in conßict. They were
strongly disagreeing with one another as to the best way to im-
prove their product. It is fantastic when a team does this. What
more can you ask for than when a team cares so much about the
service they are providing or the product that they are produc-
ing? They had open, honest communication. What team spirit!
Empowerment
You get a high-spirited team when you give them empower-
ment
Ñ
the right to make decisions that concern the work they
are doing. Of course, you set boundaries of time, money,
choices, and so forth. But once you give the team theÞnal power
of decision making, you will notice a conÞdence, camaraderie,
and a feeling of strength emerge. Whatever you do, make sure
you do not empower teams that are not ready for it. That is
disaster. Many new managers make this big mistake. They prob-
ably do it because they want to get into the good graces of the
team. Make sure the team is ready for empowerment or you and
the organization will suffer from the consequences of their poor
decisions.
PAGE 44.................11066$$CH9 11-23-04 15:24:25 PS
Building Team Spirit45
Clear Roles and Responsibilities
Can you walk up to any one of your team members and have
this person clearly de
fi
ne his or her role and responsibilities on
the team? Can you walk up to any one of your team members
and have this person clearly define the roles and responsibilities
of every other team member, including yours as the leader?
When team members can do this, they know what is expected
of them and what is expected of every other team member. They
also know on whom they can count for helping them with their
work. All of this leads to a high-spirited team environment.
Effective Leadership
Read the following list. Check off the items that you currently
do. Develop an action plan for any items not checked. When you
are able to check off all the items, you are doing your part in
building a high-spirited team. As leader, you should do the fol-
lowing:
Set clear goals for each team member and the team.
Give clear directions for those who need it.
Share examples and experiences of your personal suc-
cesses and mistakes in order to relate to the team.
Emphasize the positive rather than the negative in your
talks with your team.
Give continual feedback to each team member and to the
team
 - 
both positive and constructive.
Use small successes to build team cohesiveness.
Practice what you say.
Express your and the organization's appreciation through
rewards, if available.
Develop a constructive relationship - both you and the
team are working together toward the same goals.
Make change happen for the better by encouraging cre-
ativity and innovation.
PAGE 45.................11066$$CH9 11-23-04 15:24:25 PS
46So You're Going to Manage People
Encourage self-reliance and self-development.
Encourage team members to express their views during
con
ß
ict and share yours with them.
Have your team see its connection to the larger organiza-
tion and to customers and/or the community.
Reward and Accountability System
This last factor for building a high-spirited team is the responsi-
bility of the organization and the managers working together.
Many organizations preach teamwork. You walk around the
building and see posters hanging up with happy groups of peo-
ple working and playing together. You read company mission
statements and they say something about being the best team.
And people are assigned to teams. But yet teamwork is lacking.
Why is this? It is because the organization and its managers do
not hold people accountable for working in teams or reward
them for it.
If we truly expect people to cooperate with each other
for the common good of the organization, we cannot only evalu-
ate them, rate them, or give them performance appraisals just
for their individual contribution. We have to do all of that for
their team contribution as well. When team members get the
message that you are holding them accountable based on how
good they are as team players, they quickly get the message that
teams count. It beats those posters! You have to do the same
thing with the reward system. That is, reward people for both
their individual and team contributions.
Some managers claim that it is not a good practice to re-
ward some team members more than others. They say that you
will never have high-performing teams if you do that. Those
managers should take a look at the most successful professional
sports teams. They all have some team members who earn more
based on the roles they play or their achievements. It works there
and there is great team spirit on those teams. Look at many suc-
cessful and spirited work teams. You will oftenÞnd individual
team members making higher salaries or getting special rewards
for their individual contributions. It works in those situations,
and there is great team spirit on those teams as well.
PAGE 46.................11066$$CH9 11-23-04 15:24:25 PS
PARTTWO
TACKLINGYOUR
NEWDUTIES
PAGE 47.................11066$PRT2 11-23-04 15:23:31 PS
This page intentionally left blank
10
Managing Problem
Employees
Not every employee you manageis going to be successful on the
job. Someone who is performing poorly may require additional
training, transfer to another area where the employee may shine,
or ultimately, outright dismissal. Too often, in large companies,
managers unload their problem employees onto another depart-
ment. This is not being fair to your fellow managers, unless you
really believe that the employee will do better in a new depart-
ment where there is a better match for his or her skills. In some
companies, I have even seen managers promote their poor per-
formers, just to get rid of them. When asked by the manager of
the other department how the prospective candidate is perform-
ing in the current job, these managers are not completely candid
in their reply. I think the only correct policy in this situation is
to be open and honest. Someday you yourself may be looking at
people in other departments as candidates for promotion into
your own department, and your best guarantee of not getting
someone elseÕs rejects is never to deliver that kind of cheap shot
yourself.
You can probably relate to the following story involving a
Þrst-time manager. After he had reviewed performance apprais-
als of people one level below the job he was attempting toÞll in
his division, he selected three likely candidates. As is customary,
PAGE 49
49
.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:29 PS
50Tackling Your New Duties
he called the managers of these candidates and got a glowing
report about one in particular, a young man. He promoted him
to his department and he ended up being a complete disaster.
He had to terminate him after a short period of time because he
wasn
'
t doing the job. Thefirst-time manager then confronted the
person who had made the recommendation and asked for an
explanation, never dreaming he had been mousetrapped. The
answer he got was that the employee had not been satisfactory
and the manager was tired of dealing with him. Because the
previous manager was not candid, thefirst-time manager was
tricked into doing the dirty work. He eventually had to termi-
nate the employee.
Of course, there is a great temptation to pay back such a
manager in kind, but the solution is to make sure no one ever
does that to you in thefirst place. Retaliation in an intracompany
operation is not bene
fi
cial to anyone.
Rehabilitation
There
'
d be nothing wrong, however, in attempting to rehabili-
tate a nonproductive employee if it were done with the full
knowledge of everyone involved. In the situation just described,
for example, had the fellow manager sat down with thefirst-
time manager and indicated that the employee was not doing a
good jobbutthere were strong reasons for wanting him to have
another chance, thefirst-time manager might have taken the per-
son. There have been many trials like this one that have been
successful. The job and the employee were not a goodfit, but
the employee had talent; the move to another area where that
talent could be better used turned a less-than-satisfactory em-
ployee into a productive one.
Generally, however, you
'
ll be much more effective as a
leader if you can solve your own problems in your own depart-
ment and not unload them onto another department. Compa-
nies use many testing devices to put people on jobs that are
natural for them, or at least to place them in working areas of
some personal preference. These devices range from simplefive-
PAGE 50.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:30 PS
Managing Problem Employees51
minute tests to complex three-hour psychological evaluations.
This is something your company either already has or should
consider having. To emphasize my point again, you must always
be conscious of the advantages ofÞtting employees to jobs at
which they have the best chance of being successful. It is much
easier to move people around into jobs that are natural for them
than to force them into jobs they perform poorly and then try to
ÔÔ
educate
ÕÕthem. It just doesnÕt work all that often.
Serious Personal Problems
Some subordinates have personal problems that hinder their at-
tendance and their performance on the job. You would be quite
naive to believe that alcohol, drugs, or serious family difÞculties
were not going to affect your management responsibilities.
Just because you
Õ
re a manager doesn
Õ
t mean you
Õ
re
equipped to handle every problem that comes your way. Many
enlightened companies recognize this fact and have established
employee assistance programs. These programs are usually
community supported, unless the company is large enough to
justify an on-site service. Employee assistance programs have
professional resources available, have connections with chemical
dependency programs, and know all the services that exist
within the community.
It
Õ
s foolish for you as a manager to believe that you have the
capacity and the resources to solve any and all problems. If you
try to handle a situation beyond your professional competence,
you run the risk of making the situation worse. As a manager,
your responsibility is to see that the job is done within the
boundaries of sound management principles. The employee
Õ
s
personal problem is interfering with accomplishing that objec-
tive. Although rescuing a human being is also a legitimate objec-
tive, you are swimming in uncharted waters.
Also, under the eyes of the law in most states, a manager is
viewed as someone who is not qualiÞed to give personal advice.
The following case occurred several years ago in a computer
manufacturing company in Salt Lake City. There was an assem-
PAGE 51.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:30 PS
52Tackling Your New Duties
bly line worker who was late about half of the time, sometimes
by as much as forty tofifty minutes. In addition, her perform-
ance was going downhill quickly. After a few weeks of this
behavior, her manager spoke to her about it. The employee apol-
ogized and said that the day care center where she sent her
young son often opened late. She said she could not just leave
her son on the doorstep and come to work. She also said she
worried about her son all day because she did not know how
good the center was and this was affecting her performance.
The manager replied,''Take my advice. Send your child to
the day care center where I send my children. It opens one hour
earlier. If you do this, and I strongly suggest that you do, you
will no longer be late and you will not have to worry about his
care.
''The employee heeded the advice of the manager. Without
going into the gory details, something unfortunate happened to
the employee
'
s young son at this''new''center. The employee,
with the assistance of legal council, sued the company and won.
The court ruled that a manager is not quali
fi
ed to give per-
sonal advice. The manager should have referred the individual
to human resources or to a quali
fi
ed service such as employee
assistance. Switching day care centers was up to the employee.
Of course, you must listen to your employees and be supportive
of what they are going through. Keep in mind that all your team
members have challenging lives outside of work and they all
have made adjustments to be at work.
You will probably need to have a direct confrontation with
the problem employee, but you will have to define youroverall
objectivefirst. Your objective is to straighten out a work problem.
You need to insist that troubled employees solve their problems,
and you can even direct them to the employee assistance pro-
gram. You have to make it clear that if they choose not to solve
the problem, they may be dismissed from employment. Take
care not to do this in a cruel, uncaring way, but be sure to be
fi
rm so there is no misunderstanding.
You must be willing to listen, but not to the extent that prob-
lem employees spend a great deal of time in your office talking
when they should be working. There is afine line between being
a good listener and allowing people to get away from their work
PAGE 52.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:30 PS
Managing Problem Employees53
for two hours while they drink coffee and pour out all their
problems to you.
Sooner or later in your management career, you
'
ll hear of
every conceivable problem (along with some inconceivable
problems). People are involved in the totality of life; they have
problems with spouses, children, parents, lovers, coworkers,
themselves, religion, diets, feelings of self-worth, and so on.
A cardinal rule in dealing with human frailties, one that
will save you endless aggravation, isdon't pass judgment.Solve
the work problem, and point employees to where they can solve
their personal problems. In some cases, you may demand that
they solve the problem because of what the failure tofind a solu-
tion is doing to the work environment.
How to Manage Challenging
Behavior Types
As a new manager, you are likely to run into many different
types of employees whom you willfind challenging. When
faced with managing them, you must confront their behaviors.
If you let these behaviors slide, you are giving the message that
it is OK to keep behaving that way. Also, the rest of your staff
will lose trust and con
fi
dence in you. They will feel you do not
have the ability to handle dif
fi
cult employees or you don
'
t care.
The best way to confront these challenging behaviors is to
tell the employees what behaviors they need to change and why.
Then you want to listen to them. They may have good reasons
for behaving the way they do. Then you need to get them to
agree that they will change and discuss how you will monitor
their behavior. Make sure to give positive feedback when they
show signs of improvement. Of course, you want to come to this
''
confrontation
''meeting prepared with examples of what you
mean in case they doubt what you are saying or are not sure
what you mean. Be positive and try to help the person change.
It will be much easier for you if they do. Having to put someone
on a discipline procedure can be a nightmare for everyone. You
may have no other choice, but it should always be your last alter-
native. We will talk more about discipline in Chapter 14.
PAGE 53.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:31 PS
54Tackling Your New Duties
Here are a few of the types of employees that most new
managersÞnd the most challenging. There are many others. Be
on the outlook for them. Use the suggestions discussed here for
confronting their unacceptable behavior.
The Attacker
This is the person who always disagrees with what you say or
with what other team members say. The Attacker tries to under-
mine you and block the efforts of the group or department from
achieving its goals.
The Comic
This employee thinks his or her main job at work is to entertain
others. Laughter in the workplace is great, but when done to
excess it distracts from getting the job done.
The Deserter
This individual either mentally or physically leaves the team.
The Deserter drops out and stops contributing. This person
stops performing at work.
The Limelight Seeker
The employee likes to take credit for the work done by others
and goes around bragging about how crucial he or she is to the
success of the organization.
The Moonlighter
This employee treats his or her regular job as secondary to some
other interest. At one company with about 3,500 employees, a
manager had troubleÞguring out one of his employees, named
Joy. From August to January, Joy was the busiest employee you
PAGE 54.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:31 PS
Managing Problem Employees55
could imagine. She was always on the telephone or her com-
puter or holding meetings in the conference rooms. But from
February through July, Joy sat around with nothing to do. Take
a wild guess what Joy was up to. She ran the company's football
pool and made it her full-time job!
The Not-My-Jobber
This employee does nothing unless it is in his or her job descrip-
tion. If you asked this person to drop something at HR on the
way to lunch, he or she would refuse. After all, where does it
say that is one of his or her responsibilities or goals?
The Bleeding Heart
These employees feel they given their lives for the company and
have received nothing in return, and want everyone to know it.
The bleeding heart usually has no life or no enjoyable life out-
side of work.
The Complainer
This type likes to moan and complain about everything. It could
be the workload, the other employees, the boss, the customer,
the drive to work, the day of the week, the time of the day, and
so on. Complainers are dangerous because their''fever''easily
spreads to others.
There are obviously many other types of challenging em-
ployees. As a manager, you need to expect all kinds of difficult
behaviors and confront them as soon as possible.
PAGE 55.................11066$CH10 11-23-04 15:24:31 PS
11
Hiring and Interviewing
There are probably as many different hiring practicesas there are
companies. It would be impossible to cover all the various meth-
ods, so letÕs make a couple of simple assumptions. LetÕs say the
human resources department does the initial screening, but you
have the ultimate decision-making authority as to who comes to
work in your area of responsibility.
The Use of Tests
With greater federal, state, and sometimes city participation in
hiring procedures, your company may not do much testing of
prospective employees. There are many legal requirements to
follow when testing. But testing is among the best ways to deter-
mine if candidates really have the skills they claim they do.
There are many companies that pay their job candidates for their
interview time because they keep them there an entire day in
order to test them.
The quality of prospective employees will vary a great deal.
When unemployment rates are high, youÕllÞnd greater interest
being shown in the job and youÕll have a larger number of pros-
pects to choose from. The reverse will be true when unemploy-
ment rates are low. There are even situations where available
PAGE 56
56
.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:32 PS
Hiring and Interviewing57
employees are so few that you
Õ
d consider hiring just about any-
one who appeared at your desk. So, there
Õ
ll be forces beyond
your control. We
Õ
re concerned here with situations you can
control.
The Missing Ingredient
Almost without exception, when managers are asked what is
the most important ingredient in hiring a new employee, they
come up with experience, quali
Þ
cation, or education. They
rarely come up with the missing ingredient:attitude.
You can hire an employee with all the experience, educa-
tion, and quali
Þ
cations you could hope for, but if the person has
a bad attitude, you have just hired a problem employee. On the
other hand, you can hire a person with less experience, educa-
tion, and quali
Þ
cations, and if that person displays an outstand-
ing attitude, in all likelihood you will have an outstanding
employee. Every experienced manager will agree that attitude is
the most important element in an employee.
The Screening Process
Most managers do too much talking and too little listening dur-
ing the interview process.
The interview with the prospect is a two-way sizing up.
Naturally, the prospect wants the job, so candidates will give
you the answers they believe will maximize their chances. Any
applicant who doesnÕt do this isnÕt bright enough to be hired.
Don
Õ
t ask questions that are so difÞcult the prospect canÕt
possibly answer them. Here are some questions to avoid that
managers who pride themselves on being tough interviewers
might ask:
ÔÔWhy do you want to work here?ÕÕ
ÔÔWhat makes you think youÕre qualiÞed for this job?ÕÕ
ÔÔ
Are you interested in this job because of the salary?ÕÕ
PAGE 57.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:33 PS
58Tackling Your New Duties
Dumb questions like these will make you a rotten inter-
viewer. You must strive to put the prospect at ease so that you
can carry on a conversation. Your aim is to get to know the pros-
pect better, and that means avoiding a confrontation. Rather,
make statements or ask questions that will relax the applicant.
Hold the tougher questions
Ñ
but not the previous three ques-
tions
Ñ
for later in the process. Consider the following sample
interview.
Mrs. Valencia
í
s Job Interview
The objective ought to be toÞnd out if the applicant meets the
job quali
Þ
cations andhas a good attitude.It makes sense to spend
the early part of the interview engaging the applicant in some
nonthreatening small talk.
Most applicants are nervous. They have a great deal riding
on the results. The goal is to put the person at ease. By not imme-
diately going to the business at hand, you let people know
you
Õ
re interested in them as a person, apart from the job. It is
important that you develop a comfortable relationship. If this
person is going to work for you, it
Õ
s the beginning of what could
be years of daily contact. Even when candidates donÕt get the
job, they will feel more kindly toward you and your company
because you
Õ
ve shown a sincere interest in them.
Note: A company has manyÔÔpublicsÕÕ: the general public,
the customers, the industry it is part of, government agencies
that it comes in contact with, and your employees and those
who apply to be. In one case, a woman who was a substantial
patron of an upscale department store thought that it would be
fun to have a part-time job there. She resented the treatment she
received when she applied for a job, and vowed never to set foot
in the store again. That cost the store thousands of dollars a year
from her purchases alone, not including the purchases all her
friends would have made had she not shared her negative expe-
rience with them.
When the small talk is over, you might consider using this
approach:ÔÔMrs. Valencia, before we start talking speciÞcally
about the position you
Õ
ve applied for, I
Õ
d like to tell you a little
PAGE 58.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:33 PS
Hiring and Interviewing59
about our company. Because, while weÕre considering you,
you
Õ
re also considering us, so we want to answer any questions
you may have about our company.
ÕÕ
Then go ahead and tell her something about the company.
Tell her what your purpose is, but donÕt spend too much time
on statistics. Talk more about the companyÕs relationship with
its employees. Tell her anything in this area that is unique. You
want her to get a feel for the company and its people. This addi-
tional talk is to give her a feel for the company she wishes to be
a part of, and it also gives her more opportunity to relax and feel
comfortable.
We now arrive at the critical point in the interview. You
want to ask questions that are going to give you some clues
about this person
Õ
s attitude. Most people-oriented managers
(and that is most of them) cannot stand a vacuum, so if the appli-
cant doesn
Õ
t respond promptly, they tend to move in and try to
help out. It
Õ
s an act of kindness, but in this case, it interferes with
obtaining the crucial information you need to make a proper
selection.
Questions to Ask and What You Can Learn
Some sample questions to ask are:
ÔÔWhat did you like best about your last job?ÕÕ
ÔÔWhat did you like least about your last job?ÕÕ
ÔÔHow did you feel about your last manager?ÕÕ
These are sample questions. You might devise some of your
own that seem more appropriate for you, but until you do, con-
sider using the ones suggested here.
Let
Õ
s examine each question and whatÔÔrightÕÕandÔÔwrongÕÕ
answers can tip you off about employee attitude.
If the answer to question 1 mentions items such as the chal-
lenge of the job, the fact that the company promotes from within,
that the company encourages and assists with educational op-
portunities, or that self-starters are appreciated, you have indica-
PAGE 59.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:33 PS
60Tackling Your New Duties
tions of someone who has recognized what is important in a
sound working environment.
However, if the person
Õ
s answer mentions things such as
the of
Þ
ce being closed every other Friday, which makes for nice
long weekends; that the company provides many social activi-
ties, including both a bowling and a golf league; and that em-
ployees receive a paid vacation theÞrst year with the company,
you may have an applicant who is looking for a place to social-
ize. This person may be a social butterßy, and while there is
nothing wrong with enjoying the company of others, that
should not be the main reason for seeking the job.
Now letÕs discuss some potential answers to question 2,
about the items liked least on the last job. If the answer involves
something such as being required to work overtime occasion-
ally, being asked to come in on a Saturday, or being expected to
give up a Saturday to go to a community college for acquiring
some skills that will be helpful on the job, even though the com-
pany paid the seminar fee, those are wrong answers.
However, if the answer mentions that the company had no
formal performance appraisal system, that the granting of raises
didn
Õ
t seem to bear any relationship to quality, or that there
wasn
Õ
t anything the person really disliked, but just feels there
might be better opportunities elsewhere, those are thoughtful
ÔÔ
burn no bridges
ÕÕresponses. LetÕs now move to question 3.
YouÕll note that the question is more open-ended. If the applicant
really trashes her last supervisor and is generally negative, such
as,ÔÔI donÕt think I ought to use the kind of language it takes to
describe the SOB,
ÕÕthat is a negative answer.
Let
Õ
s assume that the relationship with the last supervisor
was terrible, but she answers,ÔÔWell, as with many bosses, we
had our differences, but I liked and respected her.ÕÕThat is a
diplomatic description of what may have been a bad situation.
Questions from Applicants
You may also say to the applicant,ÔÔIÕve been asking you all these
questions. Do you have any questions youÕd like to ask of me?ÕÕ
The questions asked by the prospect can also provide clues to
attitude.
PAGE 60.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:34 PS
Hiring and Interviewing61
What if questions from the prospect are along these lines?
ÔÔHow many holidays do you close for each year?ÕÕ
ÔÔHow much vacation do you give theÞrst year?
ÔÔHow long do you have to be here to get four weeks vaca-
tion?
ÕÕ
ÔÔWhat social activities does the company sponsor for the
employees?
ÕÕ
ÔÔWhatÕs the earliest age you can retire? How many years of
service do you need?ÕÕ
Questions along this path indicate someone who has an atti-
tude focused on getting out of work rather than into it. These
samples are obvious, and again overdrawn to make the point.
Some questions asked by the applicant may be subtler than this,
but are still a tip-off of an undesirable attitude.
The following sample questions asked by applicants reßect
a decidedly different attitudinal bent:
ÔÔ
Are people promoted based on performance?
ÕÕ
ÔÔ
Can an outstanding performer receive a larger salary in-
crease than an average performer?ÕÕ
ÔÔDoes the company have regular training programs for the
employees, so they can broaden their work skills?
ÕÕ
The thought may have entered your mind that the applicant
is giving you the answers he or she thinks you want to hear. If
that is so, it indicates you are not interviewing a dummy. IsnÕt
an employee who can anticipate what the answers ought to be
going to be a better staff member than an applicant who hasn
Õ
t
a clue as to how to respond? Job prospects who trash a former
company or manager, even if deserved, say more about them-
selves than about the object of scorn. There is no way such an
approach will advance the candidateÕs prospects for the job, so
the insightful person will avoid negative comments about past
working relationships.
An important strategy the manager brings to the interview
process is silence. When a person does not answer right away,
PAGE 61.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:34 PS
62Tackling Your New Duties
the silence may feel uncomfortable but if you jump in, you are
not as likely to get the real answer.
The human resources department probably has oriented
you in the types of questions that can and cannot be asked. You
need to know the areas that you cannot move into because they
are discriminatory or illegal, or both.
One forbidden question that comes to mind is,ÔÔDo you
have to provide child care for children?ÕÕKnowing that is one of
the topics you cannot broach, if the applicant asks about work
hours, do not consider that a negative question. It may be trig-
gered by a concern about child care.
Another question from an applicant that should not be con-
sidered a negative has to do with health insurance. An employee
asking about health beneÞts is showing responsibility. In short,
it is the general tenor of questions that indicates an attitude
problem. You must use your good judgment about which sub-
jects denote attitude and which indicate responsibility.
As you obtain more experience with the interview process,
you will become more skilled at it. In most job interviews, em-
ployee attitude is completely ignored. Typically, managers hold
applications in their hands and say,ÔÔWell, I see you worked for
the XYZ Company.
ÕÕLook that application over before you sit
down with the applicant. Don
Õ
t see it for theÞrst time in the
presence of the applicant. Then ask the questions that reveal
work attitudes.
The Effects of Unemployment Rates
If your town has a high unemployment rate, youÕll get better
acting performances from prospective employees. (If you des-
perately needed steady work and a steady paycheck, youÕd take
almost any kind of job. YouÕd also be more adroit in selling the
interviewer on why you should have the job.)
With high unemployment, you
Õ
ll also run into overquali
Þ
ed
applicants. No doubt, you can empathize with these people in
their current dilemma. But you should also realize that once
other opportunities open up that make it possible for them to
PAGE 62.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:35 PS
Hiring and Interviewing63
cash in on their full qualiÞcations, you will lose these employees.
First, if people are working below their capacity, they are not
challenged in the job. Second, they are immediately looking for
a better job.
Knowing the unwillingness of most managers to hire over-
quali
Þ
ed workers, some desperate applicants will shade their
quali
Þ
cations on the application, so that their greater education
or experience is hidden. If you hire overqualiÞed people, be pre-
pared to lose them.
The Comfort-Zone Underachiever
A comfort-zone underachiever (CZU) is a person who is highly
quali
Þ
ed but doesn
Õ
t like being challenged. There are many of
them around, but very few of them admit it.
One of the main problems for CZUs is convincing you they
genuinely want to work at a position that seems far below their
capacity. They often get burned, in that theyÕre not hired for jobs
they want because they
Õ
re overquali
Þ
ed. They soon discover that
the way to handle this is not to list all their qualiÞcations on the
job application. The registered nurse who doesn
Õ
t want to prac-
tice nursing may not indicate her training in thatÞeld. She may
trim her list of quali
Þ
cations toÞt the clerical job she wants.
Likewise, the schoolteacher who really can
Õ
t stand young chil-
dren in a classroom environment may not list all his credentials.
Handling previous work experience on the job application gets
more dif
Þ
cult because the trained interviewer will zero in on
any gaps. So, if our teacher really wants the job as the of
Þ
ce
ÔÔ
lawn man,ÕÕhis application might show him as a member of
the school
Õ
sÔÔmaintenance crewÕÕrather than of its teaching staff.
Since you
Õ
re interested in getting ahead and managing
other people, you may have dif
Þ
culty understanding applicants
with this kind of personality. DonÕt underestimate them. They
certainly aren
Õ
t stupid. They see work from a different perspec-
tive than you do. It isnÕt a matter of whoÕs right and whoÕs
wrong. Each attitude is right for the person involved.
It is like the forty-Þve-year-old CZU dentist who despised
PAGE 63.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:35 PS
64Tackling Your New Duties
the nineteen-year-old he once was because of the decision to
spend the rest of his life looking into peopleÕs mouths andÞlling
teeth. There are many unhappy people working at unsuitable
jobs and we should respect CZUs for having the courage to
change their situation. People resist change, and the combina-
tion of resisting change and knowing change is necessary leads
to inner emotional conßict. ThatÕs what psychologists call avoid-
ance
Ñ
avoidance con
ß
ict: You
Õ
re trapped by having to choose
between two unpleasant alternatives because by doing nothing
you
Õ
re eating yourself alive.
The comfort-zone underachiever is trying toÞndÔÔwhatÕs
right for me.
ÕÕThe jobs CZUs take may be temporary; theyÕre at
a crossroads in a period of reassessment. Often, theyÕre looking
for a job that won
Õ
t divert them from their search. The job will
require a minimum of attention, thus freeing them to think, to
sort things out. Often, theyÕll go after a job thatÕs highly repeti-
tive in nature that can be done accurately without effort, thus
enabling them to daydream. Certain jobs in your own company
would doubtless drive you bananas in two hours, but there are
people who enjoy doing those jobs; it
Õ
s a matter of the properÞt.
Work and Play
The wordworkhas a bad image for many people. To them, work
is a form of punishment. Perhaps it goes back to the ejection of
Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden. If they had not been
driven out, they
Õ
d still have had toÞgure out a way to occupy
themselves, but the activities would have been by choice and so
would have been thought of as play rather than as work. If a
person plays tennis for a living, itÕs work; but if a person plays
it for recreation, itÕs play. It is still tennis. Perhaps it comes down
to a distinction between have-to and want-to situations. That is
why many people who are independently wealthy still work.
For them, it
Õ
s a want-to situation.
Describing the Job
In describing a job, you should include some basic information
that everybody would like to have, so that they don
Õ
thaveto
PAGE 64.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:35 PS
Hiring and Interviewing65
ask. Tell them the hours, starting salary, length of probationary
period, and whether successful completion of the trial period
generates a salary increase. You can also include a brief overview
of the bene
Þ
ts package. By getting this basic information out of
the way, you avoid cluttering up the open-ended questions that
provide the attitude clues needed to make a hiring judgment.
Let
Õ
s return to the sample interview with Mrs. Valencia. In
talking with her about the job, describe it in nontechnical
terms
Ñ
use terms she
Õ
ll understand. The jargon and acronyms
of your business may be commonplace to you, but they are a
foreign language to new employees. The same situation exists
with job descriptions. If they are written in technical jargon, they
will mean very little to prospective employees.
Making the Hire
If you
Õ
re considering several people for the job, be careful not to
mislead any of the prospects. Tell them that a decision will not
be made until all the prospects have been interviewed. They
should appreciate the fairness of that arrangement. Tell them
that they will be called as soon as a decision has been reached.
See that they are phoned that day and informed of the decision.
At most companies, prospects are phoned by the human
resources department and told that a decision has been made.
You might, of course, want to deliver the good news yourself
and phone the person selected. This approach may make you a
big shot with Mrs. Valencia, but it won
Õ
t do a whole lot for your
image with the human resources department: They handle the
dirty work; you handle the good news. If they have to inform six
people that they didnÕt get the job, at least let them deliver the
good news to the one who is going to be hired.
TheAttitudeTalk
After the applicant is selected for the job, you should have your
ÔÔ
attitude talk
ÕÕwith the person. Following is an example of a
PAGE 65.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:36 PS
66Tackling Your New Duties
good attitude talk. You
Õ
ll develop your own style after a while,
but the basic thoughts remain the same:
''One of the reasons you were selected for this posi-
tion is that you display the kind of attitude we want in this
organization. Your application and tests indicate that you
have the capacity to handle the job. Many of the people
who applied had the qualications to do the job, but the
one reason you were selected above all the others was that
you display the kind of attitude we are looking for. We be-
lieve that the difference between an average employee and
an outstanding one is often attitude.
''Not everyone in this organization has a great atti-
tude. What do we mean byattitude? The attitude we're
talking about is one where you are not worrying about
whether you're doing more than your share. It's an attitude
of pride in doing high-quality work and gaining a sense of
accomplishment at day's end. It's personal satisfaction in
a job well done. We believe you display that kind of atti-
tude, and coupled with your ability to handle the job, you
will make an outstanding addition to our organization.''
Now letÕs analyze the reasons for some of the statements in
this mini-speech.
When is an employee most likely to be receptive to ideas
about the job? IsnÕt it at the start of a new position?
Do people generally try to live up to the image they think
you have of them? I think they do. Recall the interview
and the possibility that the applicant may have been dis-
playing the attitude she thought you wanted. She now
knows that attitude is exceedingly important to the com-
pany and to you as her manager. She now needs to dis-
play such an attitude on the job. Isn
Õ
t that a win-win
situation for both her and the company?
Why advertise the fact that there are people in the com-
pany who do not have a great attitude? If you remain si-
lent about some who may have an undesirable attitude,
your words become hollow indeed, when this new em-
ployee runs into one of them. However, since you men-
PAGE 66.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:36 PS
Hiring and Interviewing67
tioned it, now when she encounters a fellow employee
with a bad attitude, your credibility is enhanced. She may
think,ÔÔHe told me there are some with a bad attitude
like this. IÕm here to help change it.ÕÕYour credibility is
forti
Þ
ed.
The exact timing of your attitude talk with a new employee
is a matter of personal preference. Bringing the person back into
the of
Þ
ce after she has been noti
Þ
ed she got the job can be an
ideal time to congratulate the person and give the attitude talk.
It should be reinforced theÞrst day on the job too, but in a low-
key way because there are so many things on the new employ-
ee
Õ
s mind that day. SheÕs nervous; sheÕs concerned about how
she
Õ
s going to like the people she is going to meet and if they
will like her. But thatÞrst day is when the new employee is most
receptive to what is expected.
PAGE 67.................11066$CH11 11-23-04 15:24:36 PS
12
Training Team Members
Many new managers believethey must know how to perform
every job in their area of responsibility. ItÕs as though they feel
that if some key person quits, they might have to get out there
and personally perform the task. If you believe in that philoso-
phy and carry it to its logical conclusion, then the chief executive
ofÞcer of the organization ought to be able to perform every job
in the company. That of course is ridiculous. ItÕs just as ridicu-
lous as believing that the President of the United States should
be able to perform every task in the federal government. The
President shouldnÕt even be able to perform every job in the
White House. You donÕt have to be a master chef to recognize
rotten chicken.
Your Responsibility for Training
Youmustknowwhatneedstobedone,notexactlyhowitÕsdone.
A lot depends on what level manager you are. If you are aÔÔper-
former-manager,ÕÕyou are responsible for doing some of the work
yourself and leading others in the same function. In that set of
circumstances, you will know how to perform the operation.
However, if you have thirty-Þve people performing a variety
of tasks, you will not know how to perform each taskÑbut you
PAGE 68
68
.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:36 PS
Training Team Members69
will have someone out there who does know how itÕs done. The
administrator of a large hospital is not able to perform surgery,
but that administrator knows the process by which skilled sur-
geons are secured and retained on the staff.
Many new managers are uncomfortable about what they
cannot do. Don
Õ
t be. You
Õ
re going to be held responsible for the
results you achieve within the conÞnes of company policy. You
will not be responsible for crossing everyTand dotting everyI
yourself.
Although this concept may be frightening to you atÞrst,
you
Õ
ll get used to it and wonder how you could have ever
thought otherwise. Your initial reaction will be,ÔÔIÕve got to
know it all.
ÕÕIf itÕs a big, varied operation, you canÕt possibly
know it all. Don
Õ
t sweat it.
Training the New Employee
Some jobs require more extensive training than others, but even
the most experienced person coming into a new situation needs
some basic training. New employees need to be trained as soon
as possible in their job, how it is done at your company, and
how theyÞt into the overall organization.
In many ways, instructions given to employees on theirÞrst
day are wasted motion. TheirÞrst day on the job is an opportu-
nity for new employees to become acquainted with the people
they
Õ
ll be working with and toÞnd out where the rest rooms
are. You should permit them to spend theÞrst day just observing
and then start the actual training the second day. Many workers
go home from theirÞrst day on the job with either a bad head-
ache or a backacheÑundoubtedly the result of nervous tension.
There are different philosophies on how a person should
be trained. The most common philosophy holds that the person
leaving the job should train a new employee. Automatically fol-
lowing that philosophy can be a mistake. Everything depends
on why the employee is leaving and on the personÕs attitude.
Training the Wrong Way: An Example
The following example shows the wrong way to train a new
employee. It demonstrates the worst kind of judgment. The
PAGE 69.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:36 PS
70Tackling Your New Duties
manager of an of
Þ
ce consisting of several salespeople and one
clerical person decided that the clerk should beÞred for incom-
petence. He gave her two weeks
Õnotice but asked her to work
during that time. He then hired her replacement and asked her
to train the new employee. The result was a nightmare for all
concerned.
And no wonder! If the person leaving your company is less
than 100 percent competent, you must never allow him to do the
training. Why would you want someoneÞred for incompetence
to train her replacement? TheyÕre likely to put no effort at all
into the training. And even if they do make an effort, theyÕll
probably pass all their bad habits on to the new employee. Even
people who are leaving voluntarily usually are not the best train-
ers. Most people who put in their notice don
Õ
t give a damn from
that point on. The training they do will be casual and incom-
plete. On the other hand, when a position opens up because the
incumbent in the job is being promoted, that person is probably
the best one to handle the training.
Concerning the manager who wanted theÞred employee to
train the replacement, he did not himself understand the clerical
job. It was impossible for him personally to train the new em-
ployee
Ñ
any attempt to do so would merely have displayed his
ignorance. He therefore went to impossible extremes toÔÔkeep
his cover.ÕÕThat is a serious managerial failure.
Don
Õ
t misconstrue this suggestion to mean that a manager
must personally know how to perform every job in the organiza-
tion. In the example given, there was only one clerical operation,
so there was no one else available. The manager took the easy
route of having the departing clerical worker train the incoming
one. Even if he couldnÕt explain the speciÞc details of the job to
the new employee, he should have been able to explain exactly
what he expected from the clerical position.
TheRoleoftheTrainer
Before starting a new employee on a training course, you must
have a talk with the prospective trainer. You should never spring
PAGE 70.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:37 PS
Training Team Members71
it as a surprise. Once the new employee is hired and a starting
date has been established, notify the person youÕve selected as
the trainer. The trainer may need to rearrange some schedules
to accommodate the assignment.
Pick a trainer who is very good at explaining what is going
on
Ñ
one who can break the job down into its component parts
and who doesn
Õ
t describe it in technical jargon. The jargon will
be picked up eventually, but thisÔÔforeign languageÕÕmust not
overwhelm the trainee.
You must outline to the trainer what you want to happen. If
you
Õ
d like theÞrst day to be casual, the trainer needs to know
that.
Sometime during the latter part of theÞrst day, you should
stop by and ask the trainer and the trainee how things are going.
What you say is not as important as your display of interest in
the new employee.
At the end of theÞrst week, call the employee into the ofÞce
for a chat. Again, what is said is not as important as the interest
displayed in the new employee
Õ
s welfare. Ask a couple of ques-
tions to determine if the instructions from the trainer are clear.
Is the new employee beginning to get a handle on the job?
The Improvement Seed
This is also the time for planting theimprovement seed.The proc-
ess might take the form of this discussion with the employee:
''As a new person on this job, you bring fresh insights to
the position that the rest of us may not have. After you
'
ve
been at it a while, you may not be able to see the forest for
the trees. I encourage you to ask any questions about what
we do and why we do it. After you've been trained, we en-
courage you to offer any suggestions you can think of to
improve what we
'
re doing. Just because you're new
doesn
'
t mean your ideas are invalid. What seems obvious
to you as a new employee may not be so obvious to the
rest of us.
''
PAGE 71.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:38 PS
72Tackling Your New Duties
The reason for emphasizingÔÔafter youÕve been at itÕÕis to
keep new employees from suggesting changes before they un-
derstand what is going on. What may seem like a good idea
early in the training may be taken care of as the nature of the
position becomes more clearly understood.
Everyone you manage must know that you regularly do this
improvement number. In that way, you make it less likely that
they
Õ
ll react negatively to new ideas.
YouÕll always have plenty of problems with people who de-
fend themselves with the statement,ÔÔWeÕve always done it this
way.ÕÕThe type of argument is usually desperate; it tells you
unmistakably that the person using it can
Õ
t come up with a valid
explanation of why something is being done.
The Job Defined
During the training period, itÕs a good idea to break the job
down into small parts and teach the functions one at a time. In
showing new employees the entire function, you run the risk of
overwhelming them. Of course, you should explain the purpose
of the jobÞrst.
Feedback
It
Õ
s important to develop a method of feedback that lets you
know how well the trainee is doing after beginning to work un-
assisted on the job. The trainee should take over the job from the
trainer on a gradual basis as each step in the process is mastered.
The feedback method should apply to every employee. The sys-
tem should be developed in such a manner that unsatisfactory
performance always comes to your attention before too much
damage is done. The process is vital to your success as a man-
ager, but no strict guidelines can be offered for establishing it
because it will vary according to the line of business youÕre in.
The feedback must be internal. Hearing about the mistake
from a dissatis
Þ
ed client or customer means it is already too late.
PAGE 72.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:38 PS
Training Team Members73
You want to correct the problem before the work gets out of your
own area of responsibility.
Quality Control
If it is possible to maintain quality control procedures your em-
ployees can relate to, so much the better. Don
'
t expect perfec-
tion; that
'
s an unrealistic goal. Determine what an acceptable
margin of error should be for your area and then strive as a team
to reach that goal and eventually better it. The goal must be
realistic if you expect the cooperation of your staff.
A baseball player batting .250 can make out extremely well
in the major leagues. One batting .300 - getting the job done
three times out of ten - is now considered a superstar. In busi-
ness, you can
'
t survive with that kind of percentage. Depending
on what kind of business you
'
re in, it
'
s questionable that you
could survive even with a 10 percent rate of error. Let's use a 5
percent rate of error for discussion purposes, even though it may
not be realistic for your business.
New employees need to know what is expected of them
once they
'
re operating on the job alone. If your ultimate goal for
them is 95 percent ef
fi
ciency, it would help them if they knew
what your interim targets are. You might expect them to be
working at 70 percent efficiency at the end of thirty days, at 80
percent ef
fi
ciency at the end of sixty days, and at 95 percent
ef
fi
ciency at the end of ninety days. This will depend on how
dif
fi
cult the work is. The simpler the job, the easier it should be
to get to the ultimate quality goal. You need to determine the
timetable and let the new employee know what it is.
Even when the new employees take over the job on their
own, you should have the trainer audit their work until you be-
lieve the work is acceptable and quality checks are not as crucial.
Each mistake should be gone over carefully with the trainee.
The trainer must be a diplomat. The trainer must talk about
what went wrong and not attack the new employee. Don't make
it personal. The trainer should not say,''You're making a mis-
take again.
''Rather, something like this might be more appro-
priate:''Well, this still is not 100 percent, but I think we're
getting closer, don't you?''
PAGE 73.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:39 PS
74Tackling Your New Duties
End of the Training Period
At some point the probationary period must end. In most com-
panies, this is usually after a specified number of weeks or
months. However, once the trainee demonstrates the ability to
work unassisted, it
'
s time for another formal interview between
you and the trainee. This marks the completion of a phase in the
new employee
'
s career, and some attention should be paid to
the event. All you really need to do is express your satisfaction
about the progress made up to this point, note that the employee
will now be working on his or her own, and indicate how the
work will be monitored both for quality and quantity.
PAGE 74.................11066$CH12 11-23-04 15:24:39 PS
13
Managing Change:
Dealing with Resistance
One of the most important aspectsof a managerÕs job is manag-
ing change effectively. Managing change includes accepting
change and supporting it, understanding why your team mem-
bers may be resistant to it, andÞnding ways to reduce that resis-
tance. When you are able to do all three of these, you have
mastered one of the most critical competencies of any manager.
Accept Change Yourself
Have you ever worked for a manager who found it difÞcult to
accept the changes that the organization had initiated? This type
of manager will openly express disagreement, call the decision
makers fools who have no clue what they are doing, and try to
convince you that most of these changes were terrible for the
staff as well. This is a terrible mistake on the part of a manager.
It causes employees to lose faith in company decisions and, ulti-
mately, in the company.
As a manager, not only do you have to be prepared to em-
brace change and be a champion of it but also to accept and
support changes that the company has decided upon, even if
PAGE 75
75
.................11066$CH13 11-23-04 15:24:43 PS
76Tackling Your New Duties
you disagree with the change. It is best to admit that you do not
like the change (as your staff may already know this), but state
that you will actively support it and expect your staff to support
it as well.
For example, let
'
s say that the company has decided to go
with a new computer system. And let's say that you feel the old
system is currently giving you what you need. What would be
the danger of not supporting the new decision? First, you are
only looking at the change from your vantage point and the ben-
e
fi
ts you do not see may not be real for others in the company.
Second, you are sending a message that your opinion counts
more than that of the organization. It is important as a new man-
ager that you get your team to align themselves with the goals
and decisions of the organization. Ideally, it would be best if you
were part of the decision-making process and upper manage-
ment asked your thoughts and listened to your opinions. Then,
perhaps, you could accept the change more readily, even if you
disagreed with it. But, unfortunately, even if they do not include
you in the decision-making process, as a manager, you must
actively communicate your support for company policies, proce-
dures, rules, regulations, and decisions.
Resistance to Change
Most people are naturally resistant to change. There is often re-
sistance even when an apparently good change is introduced in
the workplace. What makes people so resistant to change? Peo-
ple basically fear the unknown and how they will react to uncer-
tainties. In today
'
s economy, a change may mean a loss of a job.
Many may believe they do not have the skills to perform the
responsibilities that the change may bring or they are unclear
about the reasons why the change is being introduced in thefirst
place.
Resistance to change is also very subjective. That is, people
have different threshold levels to change. Some of us who have
had bad experiences with change, or grew up in environments
where change was a dirty word, will obviously be much more
PAGE 76.................11066$CH13 11-23-04 15:24:43 PS
Managing Change: Dealing with Resistance77
resistant when change occurs than those who have beneÞted
from change in the past, or were taught early on to embrace
change. Resistance to change is subjective in another way. There
are certain changes that affect people in different ways. For ex-
ample, Mary has always prepared documentation for any pack-
age she sends out so that she will be able to track it later on
if necessary, or quickly answer any questions from customers,
vendors, salespeople, and so forth. Fran has never done this; she
thinks it is a waste of her time. When the company institutes
a new policy calling for careful documentation of all outgoing
packages, Mary is unfazed. Fran reacts negatively to this new
ÔÔ
busywork
ÕÕand complains to everybody she can about it.
How to Reduce Resistance
It is unwise to think that you can totally eliminate your team
Õ
s
resistance to workplace changes. As we said, people will nor-
mally be resistant. You will be more successful if you try to re-
duce the amount of resistance. The best strategy is to involve
your employees in the change.
First, explain why the change is occurring and point out
any bene
Þ
ts to them. Often there are no bene
Þ
ts for them. The
customer may beneÞt or some other department mayßourish as
a result. Sometimes, you just have to be honest and say some-
thing likeÔÔWe will still be in businessÕÕorÔÔYou will still have a
job.
ÕÕ
Then, ask their thoughts on how the change can be imple-
mented in their group or your department. The more you in-
volve others with the change the more readily they seem to
accept it. Sometimes your most resistant employees, once in-
volved, become your biggest champions for the change. Always
try to identify the most resistant individuals from the beginning
and get them on your side. Change occurs so much more easily
when you have their support.
PAGE 77.................11066$CH13 11-23-04 15:24:44 PS
14
Disciplining the Employee
Performance standards vary by the kindof business you are in,
and may even vary by departments within the same company,
because of the variety of tasks involved.
Every employee you are managing must know what work
standards are expected. You create nasty problems for yourself
when you discipline an employee on the basis of vague work
standards. (ItÕs like the way some people describe a tasteless
movie:ÔÔWell, I canÕtdeÞne it, but I know it when I see it.ÕÕ)You
canÕt get by with a nebulous approach to performance stan-
dards.
LetÕs assume youÕve done a satisfactory job of establishing
standards for each job. In all probability, those standards are
written into a job description. The job description indicates the
elements of accountability that apply to the job; you can there-
fore measure the individual against those standards. Now you
must have methods within your area of responsibility that allow
you to be constantly aware of how people are performing in
relationship to the standards. You cannot operate on the as-
sumption that unless youÕre hearing complaints from custom-
ers, or other departments, the performance is acceptable. By the
time such warning signals arrive, severe damage may already
have been done.
PAGE 78
78
.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:46 PS
Disciplining the Employee79
Prior Knowledge
Your own attitude about performance is crucial. The place and
time for conveying your attitude about performance to employ-
ees is when theyfirst step into the job. They need to know ex-
actly what is expected of them. Performance standards will
change. During the training period, you'll accept less in the way
of quality and quantity than afterward. You should have this
properly backstopped during the training period so that the
trainee
'
s errors don
'
t reach beyond your own department.
Feedback is critical to proper and effective discipline. You
must know as soon as possible when performance is substan-
dard so that it can be corrected immediately. In the following
discussion of discipline procedures, let
'
s assume that you
'
ve set
adequate standards and that the employee knows what those
standards are. Furthermore, you have an adequate method of
feedback so that you know when substandard performance is a
problem.
Never Make It Personal
One of the oldest rules of management is that employee disci-
pline should always be done in private. Never humiliate an em-
ployee, even in cases of dismissal. The employee must always be
made to understand that what is being discussed is the perform-
ance, not the person.
Too many managers, at all levels of experience, turn a dis-
cussion of poor performance into a personal attack. In most
cases, it
'
s probably not done maliciously. This kind of approach
is simply not thought through.
The following opening gambits often get the discussion off
to a terrible start:
''You are making far too many errors.''
''I don't know what your problem is. I've never had anyone
screw up on this job like you.
''
PAGE 79.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:46 PS
80Tackling Your New Duties
ÔÔYour performance is so substandard that we donÕthavean
adjective to describe it.
ÕÕ
These are outrageous statements, but attacks like these are
uttered every working day somewhere. The managers may feel
that they are right on target, but they have just made their prob-
lems worse than they need to be.
Employees feel that they are being personally attacked.
When attacked, our natural tendency is to defend ourselves, and
the defensive barriers of these employees go up. Now both par-
ties to the conversation have toÞght through these barriers to
get back to the problem. Give employees the beneÞt of the
doubt. You might say,ÔÔI know you are concerned about the
quality of the work at your desk.ÕÕAttack the substandard per-
formance by viewing it as the result of some misunderstanding
about how the work should be done. Perhaps the employee has
missed something in the training process, and this has created a
systems de
Þ
ciency that is causing the work to fall below the
company
Õ
s standards. By taking this approach, you inform the
employee from the outset that youÕre talking about the perform-
ance and not the person.
Give and Take
You should have a conversation, not deliver a monologue. Many
managers do all the talking, meanwhile building up resentment
in the party on the receiving end. You need to encourage the
employee
Õ
s participation in the conversation. Without it there is
a good chance you won
Õ
t solve the problem.
Be careful, now, and donÕt go overboard! Some executives,
in their effort to be scrupulously fair, become so cautious and
tactful that the employee leaves their ofÞce expecting to get a
raise for outstanding performance. You have to make certain that
your direct report understands that the work is not up to stan-
dards. How you say it, though, is critically important.
When bringing the employee into your of
Þ
ce, put him or
her at ease. This may not seem like a big thing to you, but to an
employee, who doesn
Õ
t often enter the sanctum of the high and
PAGE 80.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:46 PS
Disciplining the Employee81
mighty, you
Õ
re the boss and being called into your presence may
be a frightening prospect. Therefore, do everything you can to
make the other person comfortable.
Encourage the employee to participate in the discussion
early in the game. You might start off with a statement like this:
ÔÔFred, youÕve been with us three months now and I think itÕs
time we had a conversation about how you
Õ
re getting along. As
you know, I have a great interest in your being successful on this
job. How do you feel things are going?
ÕÕ
By using this approach, you encourage an employee who is
not performing up to standards to bring up the subject himself.
It seldom comes as a surprise to an employee to learn that speci-
Þ
ed standards are not being met. Surprise is likely only if the
employee has never been told what is expected. If that is the
case, you really have some serious problems
Ñ
problems of train-
ing and communication.
As the employee describes how things are going, you direct
the conversation to the standards that are not being met. For
example, you ask,ÔÔDo you think youÕre getting close to the
standards we
Õ
ve established for experienced employees?
ÕÕIf the
answer is yes, you could ask,ÔÔDo you believe youÕre performing
at the same level as an experienced employee?ÕÕIf the answer is
again yes, then the employee may be out of touch with reality.
The point is to continue asking questions of this type until you
get the kind of response that will lead you into a discussion of
the quality of the work.
Obviously, if all your tactful efforts have failed to induce
the employee to bring up the crucial subject, you have no choice
but to insert it into the conversation yourself. To the employee
who persists in asserting that things are going well, you could
say,ÔÔThatÕs an interesting observation youÕve made about the
quality of the work, because my observation indicates that itÕs
not up to the standards weÕve set for the job. Why do you sup-
pose my information is different from yours?ÕÕYou then have the
matter out on the desk for discussion.
Eliminate Misunderstanding
As you proceed further into the conversation, you use tech-
niques that ensure the employee knows what
Õ
s expected. ItÕsa
PAGE 81.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:47 PS
82Tackling Your New Duties
good idea to get feedback on what youÕve mutually agreed
upon, so there can be no misunderstanding later about what was
said.
One way to make certain of this is to write a memorandum
at the conclusion of the conversation and place it in the employ-
ee
Õ
sÞle. This becomes particularly important if you are manag-
ing a lot of people and itÕs possible that six months from now
you won
Õ
t remember the details of the conversation.
The Primacy of the Person
There are problems about an employeeÕs performance that can-
not be separated from the person. When talking about the qual-
ity or quantity of an employee
Õ
s work, it
Õ
s obvious that the
techniques discussed in this chapter can help in establishing
Þ
rmly in the employee
Õ
s mind that a difference exists between
your criticism of the work and your view of the person. But
with certain attitudinal problems, itÕs more difÞcult to make the
distinction, and in many cases it can
Õ
t be done.
LetÕs assume you have a highly satisfactory employee who
can
Õt seem to get to work on time. Disciplining unsatisfactory em-
ployees is easier than disciplining a problem employee like this
one whom you obviously want to keep. What happens in these
situations is that if you allow the employee the privilege of com-
ing in late every day, youÕre going to create a morale problem
with the rest of the people who adhere to the ofÞce hours, no
matter how superior that personÕs performance is. (This obvi-
ously does not apply if your of
Þ
ce hasßexible working hours.)
In talking with the satisfactory employee about this problem,
one of the better approaches is to explain the management difÞ-
culties youÕdhaveifeveryemployeeignoredtheworkinghours.
You couldnÕt tolerate that situation. In addition, the employee is
creating difÞculties for himself. You can then go into the discus-
sion in some detail and start working on a solution. LetÕsfollow
through with this problem of the tardy employee, because it hap-
pensoftenenoughthatyouÕll eventually have to face it.
Most conscientious employees who are doing a satisfactory
job will react positively to your statements. You may notice that
PAGE 82.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:47 PS
Disciplining the Employee83
for the next ten days or so they appear at their desks on time. At
that point, you
Õ
ll be feeling pretty smug about your success in
managing people. YouÕllÞnd, however, that when the pressure
is off, the reformed employees will be coming in late again. You
can
Õ
t take a casual approach about this and assume it was just
an unusual set of circumstances. All your subordinates must be
made to know you expect them to be on time every day.
TheÞrst time this happens after your initial conversation,
you again have a discussion with the offender. This doesn
Õ
thave
to be a full-blown dialogue of the same length and detail as the
Þ
rst one. All you need to do is reinforce what you said pre-
viously. There may have been a sound reason for the latest time
abuse, and it could be that the second conversation will keep the
employee on the straight and narrow. If you can get to the point
where the employee is coming to work on time for approxi-
mately six months, you may assume youÕve changed that per-
son
Õ
s work patterns enough so that you no longer have a serious
problem. What you should expect from that point on is the same
attendance as you get from the rest of your employees.
Discipline for a Good Employee Gone Bad
Let
Õ
s look at a step-by-step case study regarding the use of em-
ployee time that is as challenging an employee-disciplinary situ-
ation as you are likely to face. Kelly, one of your direct reports,
does executive coaching for your consultingÞrm. She goes to
client sites and works with senior managers, one on one, helping
them with their managerial skills, computer skills, and giving
advice on project implementation. She usually spends one day a
week at a client site for a month or two. You have always gotten
the best feedback from the clients about Kelly. She is always in
high demand. You consider her to be your best staff member.
Then, the table suddenly starts to turn. You begin to receive
feedback from these same clients, and new ones, that her short
breaks ofÞve or ten minutes are turning into an hour or more a
couple times a day, and these breaks are not during lunch. After
a couple weeks of listening to these comments, you set up a
PAGE 83.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:47 PS
84Tackling Your New Duties
meeting with Kelly and tell her of the complaints you are getting
about her. You explain that it makes both her and your company
look unprofessional when she leaves one of these senior execu-
tives hanging and that these client companies are paying big
bucks for your services. You also explain that the executives have
scheduled their day around her being there.
Kelly doesn
Õ
t believe she is taking such long breaks and
ß
atly denies it. You try to open theßoor to her and have her
discuss anything that is troubling her, work-wise or personally,
but she just keeps saying that everything is perfect and that she
cannot imagine that she is taking such long breaks. You decide
on an action plan. Kelly will notify the client when she needs
Þ
ve or ten minutes (she
Õ
s a smoker), look at her watch, tell the
client what time it is and what time she will return.
You think the problem is over. But it isn
Õ
t. You continue to
receive the same complaints from clients, so you have a couple
of additional discipline sessions with Kelly. They lead nowhere.
You even suggest that Kelly visit an outside counselor, at com-
pany expense, if she wants or needs to talk to someone. She
refuses your offer. The same behavior continues. You give her
one last opportunity to change. You tell her if you get one more
complaint on the same issue she will be gone. You get several
more and Kelly is terminated.
The situation just described is one that many people would
view as a failure of management skills. ThatÕs wrong. Not every
personnel problem can be solved by accommodation. In the case
study described here, you did everything you could to remedy
the situation. You gave Kelly every opportunity to address her
behavior, to open up to you concerning whatever problems she
may have, you worked out a plan for her to follow, and you gave
her several chances to change her behavior. Since nothing you
did worked, the only solution you had was to get someone to
replace her, no matter how valuable an employee she had been
at one time.
Other Problems
It
Õ
s possible and probable that you
Õ
ll have other problems of a
similar nature, such as spending too much time on the Internet
PAGE 84.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:48 PS
Disciplining the Employee85
for non-work-related activities, consistently overstaying the
lunch hour, or just failing to show up. Needless to say, you don
Õ
t
run a sweatshop, and everyone will occasionally have some issue
at one time or other. What is critical is dealing effectively with
chronic offenders who create management problems for you
and the organization.
Another dif
Þ
cult problem that is among the most challeng-
ing for a manager to handle is personal hygiene. For example,
suppose you have a young woman in your department who has
an unpleasant body odor. Other employees are making sly com-
ments about her. Even worse, they are avoiding her. This is unac-
ceptable because their work depends on communicating with
her often during the day. Her body odor has become a business
issue and so you have to speak to her about it.
Rather than do it yourself, you may want to arrange to have
someone in human resources talk directly to the employee. The
reason would not be to avoid a dif
Þ
cult situation, but rather to
spare the woman embarrassment every time she saw you and
the misery of being constantly reminded of the uncomfortable
conversation. By having someone in human resources talk to her
away from her work area, you might solve the problem and also
be able to salvage an otherwise satisfactory employee. If the em-
barrassment is too great in a delicate situation like this, you may
lose the employee.
Disciplinary Techniques
You have a highly satisfactory employee whose work sharply
deteriorates. Needless to say, you
Õ
re continually communicating
with the employee about the deterioration. You want to retain
the employee, but youÞnd that your words are not being taken
seriously. In a situation like this one, you may recommend zero
salary increase for the employee for that year, with a full expla-
nation as to why you
Õ
re doing it. Inform the employee in ad-
vance that if the work doesnÕt get better, thereÕll be no increase
in pay. Having made that threat or stated that possibility of ac-
tion, you must then follow through on it so that you donÕt lose
PAGE 85.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:48 PS
86Tackling Your New Duties
credibility. Some people don
'
t actually believe you'll take such
action. It
'
s a technique that frequently works because people still
care about the paycheck.
Another disciplinary technique you can use is to put the
employee on probation. State that the person
'
s work deteriora-
tion needs to be corrected, and you want to give the employee
every opportunity to correct it. You must make it perfectly clear
that the substandard level of work being delivered cannot be
allowed to continue. Also, you should set a deadline for a resolu-
tion to the problem. You might say to the employee,''This prob-
lem has to be solved within one month or we'll have to make
other arrangements.
''
Butfirst, the employee must be made to understand exactly
what kind of performance is being labeled substandard. The em-
ployee must also know how to correct it and must know what
level of performance is expected. You must not arrive at the end
of the probationary period only tofind a legitimate difference of
opinion as to how the employee is performing. The standards
must be set so clearly that no disagreement about whether
they
'
ve been met or not is possible. They must be measurable
standards. You must keep a satisfactory set of records, because
you may have to justifyfiring the employee if it comes to that.
Records are also helpful in raising performance standards.
You can use the records to show your direct reports how they
improved the quality of their work. This becomes an added gain
because the employees are inspired to greater effort by pride in
their accomplishment.
New employees in a company are often put on probation,
either in line with standard company policy or as individual
cases. You cannot establish a probationary period for every em-
ployee in your department or division if it's not a company-
wide practice. Many companies use a ninety-day probationary
period. Employees doing satisfactory work at the end of that
time are taken off the probationary rolls and become regular
employees. It
'
s also customary to give a modest salary increase
in recognition of satisfactory completion of the probationary
course. If the work is not satisfactory at that point, the employee
should anticipate being terminated. Again, it should never come
as a surprise.
PAGE 86.................11066$CH14 11-23-04 15:24:48 PS
15
ÔÔOh My God!
ICanÕt Fire Anyone!ÕÕ
If thereÕs one moment that will live foreverin a managerÕs mem-
ory, itÕs theÞrst time a direct report must beÞred. ItÕs not a
pleasant task. If you enjoy it, there is something terribly wrong
with your ability to manage people.
Firing someone can be traumatic for both parties in the
drama. If youÕve done your job properly, the event will not come
as a surprise to the person who is about to get the ax.
SuddenÞrings are nearly always wrong, except in cases
where an employee has been dishonest or violent. Most compa-
nies have strict guidelines as to what offenses call for immediate
dismissal. NeverÞre someone when youÕre angry. Never take
such radical action on an impulse. When a direct report pushes
you over the edge and you feel likeÔÔshowing whoÕs boss,ÕÕdonÕt
give in to your emotions. If you do, youÕll regret it.
As you read this chapter, the thought may occur to you that
some people donÕt deserve the time and consideration that it
takes to terminate someone. Once again, most companies have
guidelines on the termination process. Ask your manager or HR
if you are not sure what they are. It is best to err on the side of
excess deliberation rather than on the side of excess haste. In
fact, some managers adopt the philosophy of neverÞring a di-
PAGE 87
87
.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:51 PS
88Tackling Your New Duties
rect report until everyone in the office is wondering why they
haven
'
t taken the step already. They may be a little extreme.
Prepare the Grounds for the Divorce
Documentation of the troublesome employee's performance is
critically important. Of course, you must keep these records for
all your employees. If your company has a formal performance
appraisal system, then you may be adequately covered.
Records are important because being sued for dismissing an
employee is becoming more common. You should ask yourself,
''If I have to, can I fully justify this dismissal?''If you can answer
yes, that
'
s all you need worry about.
Many managers agonize over every situation where they've
had to let someone go. It is better that a manager care too much
than to be completely callous about it.
The more typical kinds of discharge that you
'
re likely to
run into in your managerial career have to do with poor per-
formance and the employee's inability or unwillingness to abide
by the company
'
s standards. Some people will never be able to
cut the job. They may get to a satisfactory training performance
level but will never advance beyond that point to the perform-
ance level the job requires.
Firing is not thefirst thought that should come into your
head. You mustfirst satisfy yourself that the training has been
correct and clearly understood. Was there any kind of personal-
ity barrier between the trainer and the trainee that impeded the
fl
ow of adequate information? Go back over the employee's apti-
tude tests, job application, and other initial hiring data on the
chance that you may have missed something. Only after you are
completely convinced that you have a below-satisfactory perfor-
mer with little or no hope of bringing the performance up to
proper standards should you consider termination as a possible
solution.
Has the new employee been told that his or her perform-
ance is not up to the standard that is expected? You owe it to
your people to let them know what the situation is. And that
PAGE 88.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:51 PS
ÔÔOh My God! I CanÕt Fire Anyone!ÕÕ89
includes telling them when they
Õ
re performing well. Too many
managers assume that if employees donÕt get bad performance
reports, they know theyÕre doing okay. This is usually not the
case. Those employees tend to believe youÔÔdonÕt give a damn.ÕÕ
Mergers and Buyouts
We have been seeing an onslaught of mergers and buyouts. Usu-
ally, everyone is told that the new corporation is planning on no
personnel changes, but within six months, the personnel
changes begin. Reorganization takes place and some people are
Þ
red. After a corporate takeover, everyone is scrambling to pro-
tect his or her own position. Some people survive and some
don
Õ
t. Those who do not survive are not necessarily inadequate.
They may beÞlling positions that are duplicated in the parent
organization. Some people areÞred because they are too high in
the organization or because their salary is too high.
If you become involved in one of these takeovers, you can
only hope that the parent corporation is humane. If it is neces-
sary to let some people go, it should be done in a way that ac-
knowledges responsibility to these human beings. Continuing
their salary for a reasonable length of time, providing of
Þ
ce
space and secretarial help while they look for a new position,
and personal counseling are some methods used to soften the
blow.
It is doubtful that you as manager will have anything new
to tell employees about the takeover. You may get saddled with
the job of telling some people in your area that they are being
let go. It may even be possible that you have to select the people
who are to be let go. You may have been told to reduce staff by 10
percent or reduce salary costs by 20 percent. These are dif
Þ
cult
decisions because they often have little to do with performance.
All you can do is carry out the task in as humane a manner as
possible. Everyone knows the staff reduction is a result of the
merger, so you might as well tie it to that; it at least allows peo-
ple to save face. If they can
Õ
t save their job, saving face is some
consolation. Use whatever inßuence you have with the organiza-
tion to generate some help for these people.
PAGE 89.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:52 PS
90Tackling Your New Duties
Seniority is often a poor way to pick employees to be let
go, but thatÕs how many companies operate in the interest of
ÔÔ
fairness
ÕÕ(and to avoid being sued). If the last people hired are
theÞrstÞred, at least none of them can complain that such a
system is personal.
Downsizing
Downsizingis a word that strikes fear in employee groups. We
wonÕt get into all the controversy over downsizing, except to say
that it does not always achieve the desired results. WeÕll discuss
two basic elements: your survival as an employee and the role
you might be required to play as a new manager.
Your boss is going to be worried about his or her own sur-
vival and looking at your area of responsibility. The downsizing
tremor is felt through the entire organization. Many managers
and executives who thought they were immune from the down-
sizing virus end up being totally shocked.
The best advice is,ÔÔDonÕt let them see you sweat.ÕÕHave
con
Þ
dence in your ability. Instead of going into your boss
Õ
s of-
Þ
ce and trying toÞnd out what your prospects are for survival,
take a different approach. Asking about your survival is just an-
other problem piled on your manager. Why not say,ÔÔI know
that this is going to be a dif
Þ
cult time for you. I want you to
know that I
Õ
m here to help you any way I can.ÕÕ
No one can guarantee your survival in a downsizing opera-
tion, but you may increase the odds if you are a part of the solu-
tion rather than whining about your own job and putting an
additional burden on your managerÕs shoulders.
As a manager, you may end up giving some bad news to
people who are losing their jobs. The comments earlier under
ÔÔMergers and BuyoutsÕÕalso apply to this section as a humane
way to handle these personal contacts.
Let
Õ
s hope that the organization you are a part of is a hu-
mane one that provides some help to people who are losing their
jobs, with items such as salary continuance, continuation of
health coverage for a reasonable length of time, and major assis-
tance in helpingÞnd another job.
PAGE 90.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:52 PS
ÔÔOh My God! I CanÕt Fire Anyone!ÕÕ91
Even if you survive the downsizing, it's difficult to feel great
about your good fortune when many of your friends did not
fare as well. You may even feel a bit guilty about your survival,
and that is a perfectly natural reaction for a humane manager.
A Second Chance
When an employee's job performance is unsatisfactory, it is im-
portant to make clear in your discussion with the employee that
you
'
re addressing yourself to the work and not to the person. At
some point in the conversation, you let the employee know that
termination will come if the performance standards cannot be
met. But it
'
s not enough to let it go at that. Set a target for the
employee to reach, in terms of both work improvement and time
to achieve the goal. You need to be specific:''The average daily
errors arefive. We need to cut that down to three errors per day
by the end of the month.
''Your precise specifications serve a
dual purpose. If the employee meets the goal, you may be on
the way to solving the problemandretaining the employee. Fail-
ing that, you're ready to start the termination process.
Here are some key questions to ask yourself before taking
thefinal step of termination:
Is it possible that this employee could handle some other
job in your own area that is currently available?
If an opening is coming up in another area, can the em-
ployee make a contribution there?
Is this a situation where a person has been hired for the
wrong job? Does the company gain anything byfiring
someone who might be useful somewhere else?
Will the employee be so embarrassed by what appears to
be failure that the stigma will carry over into future jobs?
Is your company large enough that the employee could
be moved to another area with no stigma?
Former employees are part of a company's public. Can
you handle the situation in such a way that you don
'
t de-
plete your company's storehouse of civic goodwill?
PAGE 91.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:53 PS
92Tackling Your New Duties
Even though the employee won't like beingfired, can you
handle the procedure so that the employee will admit to
having been given every opportunity and will conse-
quently agree that you had no choice in the matter?
Listen to this warning against taking the coward
'
s way out
and blaming the mysteriousthey.''As far as I'm concerned,five
errors a day isn
'
t too bad, buttheysay we have to get it down to
three, ortheywill force me to let you go.''That indicates you're
merely a puppet. Someone else is pulling the strings. You don't
have a mind of your own.
You have to level with the employee who is not measuring
up. I know of managers who sugarcoat all bad news to such an
extent that the employee on the receiving end feels compli-
mented on having done an outstanding job.
Flexibility and Consistency
Some of your people will also need to be dismissed because of
excessive absenteeism. Companies have such a wide variety of
sick-leave programs, however, that it
'
s impossible to discuss
what level of absenteeism is satisfactory. Some companies have
fi
xed programs that allow, for example, one sick day per month
or twelve per year, cumulatively. Other companies have a
method that allows managerial discretion based on the individ-
ual situation. Admittedly, this kind of program is more dif
fi
cult
to administer than one with hard-and-fast rules to follow. In
evaluating the merits of each case, you must be able to defend
your decision.
One disadvantage in having no formal program is the seri-
ous risk that decisions will not be made consistently throughout
the company. For example, generous managers may be inclined
to excuse almost any absence and pay the absentee; other man-
agers may be stricter and dock for days missed. Having no for-
mal program means the communication between departments
and managers has to be extremely good, ensuring that approxi-
mately the same standards apply throughout the company.
PAGE 92.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:54 PS
ÔÔOh My God! I CanÕt Fire Anyone!ÕÕ93
The Dismissal Drama
So far we
'
ve discussed events leading up to a dismissal. Now
let
'
s talk about the dismissal itself. Let's focus on the dismissal
whose timing you control.
Most managers like to stage the drama late Friday after-
noon. By the time it
'
s over, all the coworkers of the person being
fi
red have left the of
fi
ce. Thus, the dismissed employee won
'
t
have to endure the humiliation of''clearing out''in front of an
audience. Also, the employee can use the weekend to pull things
together and prepare for seeking other employment, applying
for unemployment compensation, or doing whatever else needs
to be done.
Any money due at the time of the dismissal should be given
to the dismissed employee at the end of the interview. Being
canned is enough of an emotional blow; wondering when the
fi
nal check will arrive can only add to the misery. Severance
pay
 - 
if that
'
s the company's policy - should be given at the
same time. Unused vacation time or sick leave should also be
included in the compensation.
Put yourself in the other person's position. You're not going
to feel the termination was completely justified. Unless you re-
ceive every dollar you have coming to you, you
'
ll probably
think,''Well, I suppose I'll have to hire an attorney to get the
money this chicken out
fi
t owes me!
''Remove that thought from
the dismissed employee
'
s mind by taking care of all those mat-
ters in advance.
Another courtesy that is owed to the employee is to keep
your intention tofirehimorherasconfidential as possible. Of
course, the human resources and the payroll departments will
have to know. But other than discussing it with the necessary
management people, you should treat the matter confiden-
tially.
Thefinal scene in the dismissal drama is bound to be most
uncomfortable for you, the manager. This is because in that
highly chargedfinal interview, it's just the two of you face-to-
face, and you want to get it over with as quickly as possible.
A good way to start the dismissal or termination interview
PAGE 93.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:54 PS
94Tackling Your New Duties
is to review in brief what has happened. DonÕt drag it out and
make it a recitation of all the other personÕs mistakes. It should
go something like this:
ëëAs you know from our past conversations, we had certain
standards on the job that had to be met. I think we ap-
proached reaching those standards on a fair and reason-
able basis. As Iíve mentioned to you from time to time over
the past few weeks, the work is not up to those standards.
I don
í
t believe it
í
s because of any lack of effort on your
part. However, it hasnít worked out, and I donít think that
comes as any surprise to you. Weíre going to have to termi-
nate your services as of today. I really regret that. I wanted
it to work out just as much as you did. But it hasnít worked
out, and so we have to face up to reality. Here
í
s thenal
check, including one month
í
s severance pay plus your un-
used vacation and sick-leave time. This should give you a
continuation of income for a time suf

cient for you tond
another job.
íí
You can vary your remarks toÞt the individual situation,
but the above words say what needs to be said. They donÕt sug-
arcoat the bad news and they
Õ
re not too blunt either. You have to
come up with a statement thatÞts the situation, and one youÕre
comfortable with.
Fortunately, the days of putting a pink slip in someoneÕs
pay envelope are gone. That practice was highly inhumane. One
can understand the necessity for it in a factory where thousands
of people are all being temporarily laid off or where the entire
business is being closed and everybody is going. Situations like
that are not related to the performance of the individual. When
someone is being let go because of a failure to perform or live
up to company standards, the only way to handle it is on a one-
on-one basis. As manager, you might prefer to avoid the direct
confrontation, but it
Õ
s part of the job
Õ
s responsibilities and must
be dealt with straight on. In most companies, thisÞnal interview
is the last step in the disciplinary procedure and under employ-
ment law it is considered the appropriate thing to do.
PAGE 94.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:54 PS
''Oh My God! I Can't Fire Anyone!''95
Last Thoughts on Firing
When you consider it thoughtfully, you realize that keeping an
unsatisfactory employee on the job is unfair not only to the com-
pany but also to the employee. No one is comfortable in a job he
is not performing well.
There are many instances where beingÞred has turned out
to be the biggest favor a company can do for an employee who
isn
Õ
t suited for his or her job. It may not seem that way to the
employee at the time, but later on, sheÕll know it was the right
thing and that she actually came out ahead in the long run. Con-
sider the following true story:
A young man just out of a community college was trying to
function in an accounting position but was not cutting the mus-
tard. After being let go, he decided to continue his education.
He got his bachelorÕs degree and then was accepted into law
school and graduated near the top of his class. To make a long
story short, he is now practicing his profession very successfully.
In fact, he is the head of the law department managing a staff of
thirty lawyers in that same company thatÞred himÞfteen years
earlier.
Some managers feel like failures if they have toÞre anyone.
This statistic may help you out. Research on employee termina-
tion has shown that seven out of ten people who get dismissed
do better on their next job, both in both performance and salary.
Their former job was a poorÞt. They have found a betterÞt for
themselves.
People seem to avoid the wordfireas they do the worddie.
Instead ofdie,they saypass away, go on to his reward,orcross over.
Instead offire,they saydismiss, discharge, let go, can.There should
be nothing wrong with saying the wordsfireorterminate.
Let
Õ
s end on the most important point in this chapter. You
must be absolutely certain in your own mind that theÞring is
deserved. You must be sure youÕre being as objective as you can
possibly be. If in doubt, use a more experienced manager or HR
as a sounding board. Then when you know you have toÞre the
employee, make sure it doesnÕt come as a surprise. And handle
it in a considerate, humane, and delicate manner.
PAGE 95.................11066$CH15 11-23-04 15:24:55 PS
16
Having a Legal Awareness
It is very important as aÞrst-time managerthat you know current
employment laws, practices, and regulations set by federal,
state, and local governments in order to avoid any legal liability.
You do not need to be an expert. That is the job of human re-
sources. When in doubt about what you can and cannot do, or
if you are not sure, for example, what constitutes sexual harass-
ment in the workplace, you need toÞnd out.
It would be to your beneÞt to have a brief overview of the
main legal pitfalls that new managers need to avoid and what
your legal responsibilities are as a manager. You need to focus
on the legal issues around sexual harassment, disability, sub-
stance abuse, privacy, family and medical leave, and workplace
violence. Once again, you do not have to be the legal expert here.
However, under the eyes of the law, ignorance is not an accept-
able excuse. Far too many companies are sued and have to pay
out huge sums of money because their managers were ignorant
of the laws and/or did nothing to enforce them.
Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment occurs whenever unwelcome behavior on the
basis of gender impacts an individualÕs job. According to the
PAGE 96
96
.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:54 PS
Having a Legal Awareness97
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, sexual harass-
ment is de
Þ
ned as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sex-
ual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature that interferes with an individual
Õ
s work performance or
creates a hostile or offensive working environment.
Any organization is liable for being a hostile environment,
unless the organization can show it acted to prevent and correct
sexually harassing behavior. Basically, what that means is if you
allow or do not recognize or do nothing about sexual harass-
ment in your department, the company is legally liable. And
you can be sure they will not be too happy with you!
Danger Signs
To help you out in preventing and being aware of sexual harass-
ment in your work environments, you should be aware of the
following danger signs:
Telling sexual jokes
Making kissing sounds
Discussing sexual topics
Calling a work colleagueÔÔsweetieÕÕorÔÔhotÕÕorÔÔbabyÕÕ
Making derogatory comments about one of the genders
Having inappropriate pictures hanging up in the ofÞce or
worn on clothing or even on coffee mugs or drinking
glasses
Any form of touching that another person feels is inappro-
priate (even shaking someoneÕs hand inappropriately)
Assigning less important responsibilities to members of
one gender
Not giving promotional opportunities equally to all staff
members
Giving individuals preferential treatment because of their
gender
PAGE 97.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:55 PS
98Tackling Your New Duties
As you see this list of danger signs, sexual harassment can
be obvious behavior or it can also occur in a more subtle way.
Most organizations today have training classes on what sex-
ual harassment means and how to prevent it in the workplace.
Many other organizations have their employees take a short on-
line course and then have them state that they have read the
information and will abide by it. They may also be given a test.
Taking the test and having staff sign off on it shows the govern-
ment that the company has made every effort to educate its staff.
As a manager, you need to do everything in your control to
make sure your staff understands that sexual harassment is not
tolerated in any form whatsoever. And as a manager, you must
report any incidences of sexually harassment immediately. If
you avoid doing so, you and your organization are liable.
Disability
The termdisabilitymeans having a physical or mental impair-
ment that signi
Þ
cantly prevents an individual from performing
one or more of lifeÕs activities or having such a record of impair-
ment. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) bars discrimi-
nation against the disabled. You are allowed to tell a job
applicant (you have to do it for all job applicants for the same
position) that the job has certain physical or mental require-
ments, and ask the applicant if he or she is willing and able to
perform those duties. Most companies today make every effort
to accommodate the needs of the disabled.
It is imperative that your department is free of any discrimi-
nation or harassment of the disabled. The following example
concerns discrimination based on disability. In a local branch of
a large banking organization, two employees, both bank clerks,
were candidates for promotion to branch manager. They had
equivalent banking skills, tenure, performance reviews, and so
forth. However, one of the candidates, Henry, was really great
in customer service. Customers would always remark how help-
ful and professional Henry was. So you might be thinking that
Henry got the job because he had an edge over the other candi-
PAGE 98.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:55 PS
Having a Legal Awareness99
date, Marcia. Wrong. He did not get the job because he was dis-
abled.
The current branch manager making the hiring decision
used the following reasoning. She said that an important part of
the job was the socializing that took place after work and week-
ends with the branch manager and the staff. Quite often, these
activities were physical in natureÑrafting, bike riding, volley-
ball, and so forth. Since Henry could not participate in these ac-
tivities, the branch manager decided to promote Marcia. You
wonÕt be surprised to learn that HenryÞled a nice big lawsuit
and won.
Substance Abuse
Most companies have employee handbooks. Usually in those
handbooks is a list of behaviors, if committed by an employee
on work premises, that are cause for immediate dismissal. Using
drugs or alcohol are on the top of that list. However, drug and
alcohol abusers are considered to be physically handicapped
under the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and are thereby
protected from discrimination. As a manager, you must be
aware of the following.
First, you cannot accuse someone of being intoxicated or on
drugs. You can ask an employee if she has been drinking or
abusing drugs. If the employee denies it, you are legally re-
quired to describe the symptoms that led you to ask the question
in theÞrst place. The symptoms may be sleeping on the job,
slurring words, banging into furniture or equipment, productiv-
ity or quality issues, and so forth. Your best bet is to focus only
on the employee
Õ
s behavior. If the employee does not have a
good reason for behaving that way, you are permitted to send
the employee home for his or her safety and/or the safety of
others. If you do this, do not allow the person to drive home on
his or her own. You and the company are legally responsible if
something happens to the employee or if they person causes an
accident on the way home.
Second, do not share information about employees who
PAGE 99.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:56 PS
100Tackling Your New Duties
have suspected drug or alcohol problems. This could be the
cause of a lawsuit for defaming character. The only individuals
who you would want to share such information with are your
manager, human resources, or a quali
Þ
ed counselor.
Third, you and the organization have the responsibility
under most state laws ofÞnding avenues for an employeeÕs reha-
bilitation. You must try to get the employee to an employee as-
sistance program professional. This person can give the
employee the right guidance. If the personÕs behavior does not
improve and the person is not enrolled in a rehabilitation pro-
gram, you can begin disciplinary procedures.
Privacy
Most companies have the legal right to inspect an employee
Õ
s
work area, listen to voice mails, or look at e-mails and computer
Þ
les, if they feel they have just cause. Nevertheless, privacy is a
right guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution and most state consti-
tutions. Therefore, you need toÞnd out what information about
an employee you can and cannot disclose to other parties. For
example, you cannot disclose drug test results, payroll informa-
tion, or credit information such as consumer loans. On the other
hand, you can give references to a future employer. But in most
companies these days, a signed statement from the past em-
ployee is needed.
Family and Medical Leave
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) permits employees
to take unpaid leave for up to three months per year. Currently,
the law only holds for organizations withÞfty or more employ-
ees. Employees can apply for leave for the birth or care of a baby,
care of another child or a spouse or a close relative, or if employ-
ees have health issues of their own. Under law, an employeeÕs
job position or a similar position is guaranteed upon their re-
turn. Employees are also entitled to receive all their health bene-
PAGE 100.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:56 PS
Having a Legal Awareness101
Þ
ts while on family leave. An employee must have worked for
an organization for approximately twelve months before he or
she is eligible to apply. There are many other speciÞcs to the law
that your human resources team will know.
Violence in the Workplace
Statistics are showing that violence in the workplace is on the
rise and this should be a concern for every organization and
manager. Examples of workplace violence include threats, ver-
bal abuse, bullying, shoving, pushing, passive-aggressive behav-
ior such as going into the computer system and causing it
problems, and use of a dangerous or lethal weapon.
Every organization and manager needs to demonstrate that
they are doing everything possible to maintain an environment
free of violence. The following warning signs can signal that
your department or organization might be predisposed to vio-
lence:
Employees have no or little opportunity for their views to
be heard.
Training is not provided to develop new skills.
Poor supervisionÑstudies have shown that this is the
number one cause of increased levels of violence at work.
The violence is often directed at the bad manager.
Lack of respect for employees at any level.
Employees who have a history of workplace violence.
Employees who are having severe personal problems.
Substance abuse.
Employees who undergo signiÞcant changes in their ap-
pearance, interpersonal communication, and other behav-
iors.
An environment that encouragesÞerce competition be-
tween employees or groups of employees resulting in in-
dividuals feeling like they are losers.
PAGE 101.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:56 PS
102Tackling Your New Duties
A security system that does not do an adequate job of
screeningÔÔoutsiders.ÕÕ
If you have to deal personally with a violent individual
within your own department, try to stay calm, use nonthreaten-
ing language, try to keep the person talking, and alert company
security.
The ManagerÕsRole
You have the crucial and critical role in establishing and main-
taining a safe and respectful workplace. It is one of your most
important managerial responsibilities. It is also a legal responsi-
bility. Remember, when you are not sure what to do in any of
the areas discussed in this chapter, contact someone who does.
PAGE 102.................11066$CH16 11-23-04 15:24:57 PS
PARTTHREE
WORKING WITHPEOPLE
AND
BUILDING
RELATIONSHIPS
PAGE 103.................11066$PRT3 11-23-04 15:23:34 PS
This page intentionally left blank
17
No Secrets
Too many managers,bothÞrst-time and long-time, take some
private pleasure in knowing something that others do not know.
They assume that if you donÕt give others certain information,
they donÕt know about it. That is an incorrect conclusion. If peo-
ple donÕt know what is going on, they simply assume what is
going on. What is worse, they may assume something that is not
so, and even worse than that, they may act upon those incorrect
assumptions.
There are some bad managers out there who do not like to
share information with their direct reports. They believe that if
they keep information to themselves, they will be more power-
ful. They have it all wrong, though. The most powerful manag-
ers are those who share information with their direct reports,
thereby giving the latter the power to become self-directed.
YouÕve probably heard this beforeÑand itÕs an important
fact for managers to be constantly aware ofÑpeople donÕt act
upon the facts; they act upon their perception of the facts. It is
one of the managerÕs key duties to see that the facts and the
perceptions are basically the same.
Very little that goes on in an organization needs to be secret.
Oftentimes, the things that are secret are merely a matter of tim-
ing:ÔÔWe need to sit on this for a couple of weeks until the details
are worked out.ÕÕ
PAGE 105
105
.................11066$CH17 11-23-04 15:24:57 PS
106Working with People and Building Relationships
The delight some managers feel in holding unnecessary se-
crets from staff is potential trouble, however. If people
Õ
s as-
sumptions about what was discussed at a managersÕmeeting
are incorrect, and they act upon those false assumptions, you
build your managerial career on a foundation of rotten timbers.
It is more dif
Þ
cult to correct people
Õ
s knowledge of what isnot
sothan it is to let them know whatis soin theÞrst place.
A Typical Situation
In many organizations, there is a regularly scheduled managers
Õ
meeting
Ñ
say, it takes place at 8:30a.m. each Monday. This be-
comes known as the Monday Morning ManagersÕMeeting. ItÕs
held every Monday except when a holiday is celebrated on Mon-
day, in which case the meeting is held on Tuesday morning. (We
have all seen notices saying,ÔÔThe Monday morning meeting will
be held on Tuesday.
ÕÕ
)
If this is normally a one-hour meeting and you and a fellow
manager come strolling back together, some of the staff will
think or make comments like:ÔÔWell, I wonder what they de-
cided today!ÕÕOr,ÔÔTheyÕve been gone three hours; something
big is going on.
ÕÕPerhaps what really happened was that the
local United Way executive had asked for a meeting to explain
some organizational changes. Since your company is an impor-
tant corporate citizen, the United Way is simply building corpo-
rate support. It doesn
Õ
t directly affect the company, but it
Õ
sa
matter of community communication. The organization is hold-
ing a series of such informational meetings around town. The
meeting about the United Way is fairly innocuous, but if you
communicate nothing, some people are likely to assume that
something big is going on.
Everyone has a need to know what is going on. In employee
surveys, one of the higher rankings, in terms of what informa-
tion is most desired, goes toÔÔa need to know of changes that
affect me.
ÕÕPeople need to know even about things that may not
affect them; if they know nothing, they assume something.
Often that assumption is wrong, and too often it isnÕt even close.
PAGE 106.................11066$CH17 11-23-04 15:24:58 PS
No Secrets107
As a manager or executive, you are far better off in commu-
nicating too much than communicating too little.
Let
'
s suppose that you have thirty people in your depart-
ment and you have three section supervisors who are each re-
sponsible for ten people. The three section supervisors also have
some work assignments of their own. (This arrangement is typi-
cal for thefirst step in management.) When you return from the
Monday morning meeting, call the three supervisors into your
of
fi
ce and give them a brief overview of what went on at the
meeting. They can then inform their ten staffers. You cannot
allow these supervisors to''keep it to themselves.''They must
communicate, too.
If you follow this approach consistently, you will build a
staff that will say to friends in other departments,''Our manager
does a good job of letting us know what is going on.
''If you do
otherwise, you
'
re going to have a lot of false informationfloating
around to correct
 - 
if you ever know about it.
PAGE 107.................11066$CH17 11-23-04 15:24:58 PS
18
The Human Resources
Department
The human resources department(better known as HR) can be
one of your biggest allies when you are beginning your manage-
ment career. The department can help you out in many of the
areas that new managers are not familiar with: hiring, coaching,
training and development, employee assistance programs, bene-
Þts, wage and salary administration, discipline procedures, pro-
motions, performance appraisals, dealing with difÞcult bosses,
termination, and all the legalities involved in managing others.
It is a good idea for you to familiarize yourself with what your
HR department or HR person can do for you. For your own
success and the success of your team, you need to build a good
working relationship with HR.
A ManagerÕs Involvement in Hiring
How much you will interact with HR depends on how much
latitude youÕre allowed in the selection process. In many compa-
nies, HR does the initial screening of prospective employees, but
theÞnal decision is left to the appropriate manager.
The overall selection process is strengthened if theÞnal
PAGE 108
108
.................11066$CH18 11-23-04 15:25:03 PS
The Human Resources Department109
choice is made at the departmental or operating level. If a man-
ager had nothing to say about the person who was hired and is
unhappy with the choice, the new employee is the victim of a
situation not of his or her doing. Fortunately, most companies
allow the operating department to make theÞnal selection from
several quali
Þ
ed candidates. The usual number is from three to
Þ
ve quali
Þ
ed candidates.
Sometimes, their own bosses excludeÞrst-time managers
from the hiring process. While this exclusion may be well inten-
tioned, it is a serious mistake. The experienced manager should,
at a very minimum, include the new manager in the process.
And with some seasoning, he should allow that manager to se-
lect the people for whom she will be held accountable.
Managers have a far greater commitment to the success of
selections they
Õ
ve made than they do for those who were se-
lected for them and then assigned. The manager should not be
able to think,ÔÔI never would have hired this idiot.ÕÕThere will
be a temptation to think in those terms when the manager has
been cut out of the process.
Although people working in HR consider themselves ex-
perts on selecting employees, it doesnÕt matter who they think
is the best qualiÞed if the person is someone you donÕt want.
How you react to the recommendations of HR people is impor-
tant. You must take their recommendations seriously. This as-
sumes that through talks with you they fully understand what
the job requires. If they donÕt, itÕs because you havenÕt given
them the information they need. They canÕt be experts on every
job in the company, even with access to all the job descriptions.
YouÕre the expert on the jobs in your area of responsibility, and
you ought to know what is required.
Promotion and Other Employee Matters
YouÕll also become involved with the HR department in promo-
tions. Most of the time you
Õ
ll try to promote employees from
your own area, but when you need to look to other areas of the
company for the staff you need, the people in HR will be in a
PAGE 109.................11066$CH18 11-23-04 15:25:04 PS
110Working with People and Building Relationships
position to help you. For example, they can show you the origi-
nal data collected when the person was hired and most informa-
tion acquired since. In most cases, they
'
ll consult with the
department that employs the person you want to promote and
get important information you might not have gotten on your
own.
Also, in some companies, the HR department administers
employee bene
fi
t programs, so you could be going to HR on
behalf of direct reports who are having difficulties with some
aspect of the program.
If you haven
'
t managed people before, HR can be a strong
resource for you. You can usually go there for advice and coun-
sel on supervisory problems you have not encountered before.
The HR department is also the usual repository for books and
articles on the management of people.
In many companies, the HR department handles the educa-
tion and training of managers. Since this department serves the
entire company, you can often talk with someone there about
''
people problems
''that you might be reluctant to discuss with
your own superior. So, you can look to HR for assistance not
only in selecting people but also in managing them. The HR
department can also help you with your own career develop-
ment. They can suggest courses and programs you can take to
improve your managerial and technical skills. They can also be
consulted about promotional opportunities and develop action
plans with you for how you can achieve those promotions.
Many organizations use the HR department as a place
where employees can go with any problems they don't wish to
discuss with their own boss. This can be a valuable service both
to the employees and to the company. It is hoped that your HR
department has been properly trained and educated in its func-
tion.
In short, HR will be able to assist you in your overall man-
agement job and with your personal agenda as well. To be
highly regarded by HR is a great asset, so don
'
t be a stranger in
their part of the building.
PAGE 110.................11066$CH18 11-23-04 15:25:04 PS
19
The Current State
of Loyalty
If there is one subjectthat has fallen into disrepute in recent
years, it is loyalty. There is a prevailing attitude that loyalty
should be withheld until it is clearly proven that it is deserved:
The manager shouldnÕt receive loyalty until he or she has earned
it. The employee shouldnÕt receive it until it is demonstrated it
has been deserved. Lastly, the company doesnÕt receive loyalty
until everyoneÑmanagement and staffÑfeels it is justiÞed. So,
in many organizations, the lack of loyalty means less teamwork
because no one trusts or is loyal to anyone else.
Loyalty Is Out of Fashion
Unfortunately, loyalty in business is not currently in vogue. Al-
most everyone feels that if one company acquires another, and
the announcement is made thatÔÔwe plan no personnel changes
in the acquired company,ÕÕit is a statement with no validity. The
statement itself is perceived as theÞrst step in a major reorgani-
zation and the subsequent loss of jobs. This perception is based
on many examples of wholesale layoffs just a few months after
reassurances to the contrary.
PAGE 111
111
.................11066$CH19 11-23-04 15:25:06 PS
112Working with People and Building Relationships
There have been many greedy, ruthless acts. There also have
been some reorganizations and mergers that have been a matter
of survival for the companies involved. People have witnessed
friends in other companies being reorganized right out of their
jobs. So, there are some cynical boards, some greedy manipula-
tors, and some concerned owners trying to save a company. At
the same time, there are managers and employees who trust no
one. What to do?
Showing loyalty is considered being a bit of a Polly-
anna
 - 
or plain naive. In many cases that may be fair, but if loy-
alty gets a bad rap, then it also follows that there may be times
when it is withheld and it ought to be freely given.
Do we become cynical and never show loyalty? Or do we
give our loyalty until it is proved that it is not deserved? There
is much to recommend the second option. Being cynical not only
hurts the organization but it hurts you personally. If you have a
cynical, nontrusting attitude, you become a cynic. A comedian
who is a cynic can be a brilliant performer. A manager who is a
cynic is a tragedy.
So, it
'
s in your best interest to be loyal, not only to the orga-
nization but also to your manager and your employees. This
means not knocking your company in the community. It means
not trashing the people you supervise. Even if there are times
when you feel completely justified, avoid the temptation. Dis-
paraging remarks say more about you than they do the object of
your scorn. Give the organization and its people the benefitof
the doubt. It
'
s far better to assume that your loyalty is deserved
than that it
'
s not.
PAGE 112.................11066$CH19 11-23-04 15:25:06 PS
20
Is There Such a
Thing as Motivation?
For many managers,their deÞnition of motivation isÔÔto get you
to do what I want you to do, with a minimum of trouble from
you.ÕÕThat is authority, pure and simple. It is deÞnitely not mo-
tivation. It is using your positional power to get people to do
things not because they want to but because they have to.
Motivation is getting people to want to do what they are
supposed to do, willingly and not by force. The best managers
spend timeÞnding out what motivates their employees, and
they try to create an environment that will help their employees
become self-motivated. There are many ways toÞnd out what
motivates your employees. You can observe their behavior, get
to know them after a few months, or have themÞll out a survey
or questionnaire. There is one other method: Ask them!
Self-Motivation
The only motivation that really works is self-motivation. When
you do a job because you want to, your motivation is self-perpet-
uating. You donÕt have to be bludgeoned into doing it. One of the
primary responsibilities of a manager is to change the feelings of
team members fromÔÔhave toÕÕtoÔÔwant to.ÕÕ
PAGE 113
113
.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:09 PS
114Working with People and Building Relationships
Also, a good manager gets the job done byÞnding out how
different people respond. If they are self-motivated, then they
might be self-motivated either to get the job done or to just get
by. They react in different ways, and you need to understand
them well enough to know how they react and to what.
Some people are self-motivated by the possibility of a pro-
motion. As soon as they see a relationship between their current
performance and a promotion, they
Õ
ll strive to perform at the
top of their ef
Þ
ciency. Others seek their managerÕs approval.
Since satisfactory performance is how they receive the approval,
that is the route they follow. Still others like to compete in a
friendly way with their peers. This type of person wants to be
the best performer in the area and so will work hard at achieving
that objective.
Many people are working simply for the dollar, and the way
to get more dollars is to perform well to maximize the next sal-
ary increase. Many others take great personal pride in doing
whatever they do well. Depending on the condition of the labor
market, a number of people will be working hard to keep from
being unemployed.
Some team members bring their feeling for family into their
attitude toward the job, but that is often tied in turn to one of
the other reasons mentioned
Ñ
pursuing the dollar. They want
to be able to provide more for the family, which requires more
dollars.
The Manager
'
s Role
Learning how to maximize the performance of staff is a perma-
nent part of your daily work life. YouÕll have varying levels of
turnover, and turnover brings in new people. You need to get
to know and understand them. Your obligation in this matter
deserves particular emphasis. Employees want to be under-
stood. They want to feel important as people, not as pieces of
production to get the job done. Your genuine concern for them
will shine through in all you do. To understand and appreciate
them doesn
Õ
t mean you need be a parentÞgure. And you need
not compromise your principles as far as quality of work is con-
cerned.
PAGE 114.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:09 PS
Is There Such a Thing as Motivation?115
Concern for and understanding of your staff are signs of
management strength, not weakness. The so-called tough, auto-
cratic boss may achieve satisfactory results for a while, but over
the long haul, the destroyer inevitably becomes the destroyed.
Many managers believe that if you are fair, concerned, and
understanding, you can
'
t be tough when the situation demands
or requires it. Nothing is further from the truth. It actually
makes the show of authority much more effective because it is
so rarely displayed.
There is one area, in particular, that you must handle with
skill and diplomacy. Remember that some of your staff might be
self-motivated because of what they can provide for their fami-
lies. Of this group, some employees will respond favorably to
your interest in their families, but others will consider personal
inquiries an invasion of their privacy. So how does a manager
handle these contradictory positions? If an employee on his own
offers information about his family, you can then inquire about
the family. In conversation, you
'
ll learn about spouse, children,
hobbies, and other interests. With this type of employee, you
can make an inquiry such as,''How did Jeff and his team do in
Little League last night?''This is a prime example of getting to
know your employees, with their permission, and itfits into the
concept that everyone is not motivated by the same things.
On the other hand, if you have an employee who never vol-
unteers anything about his or her personal life, leave it alone and
don
'
t violate the obvious desire for privacy.
In getting to know your employees, there is a tendency to
work with the new people and ignore the seasoned employees
who do an outstanding job. Of course, it
'
s important to bring the
new people up to speed, but you must never take the outstand-
ing employees for granted. The outstanding achievers need to
know how much their quality performance is noticed and ap-
preciated.
The Role Played by Titles
The value of titles is underestimated in far too many organiza-
tions.
PAGE 115.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:09 PS
116Working with People and Building Relationships
Titles don
'
t cost a company anything, so you ought to be
liberal in using them as long as you maintain equity within the
organization. For example, you can
'
t have one department lib-
eral in the use of titles and another conservative.
The banking industry is well known for this practice, and
although some executives in other businesses put them down
for it, I think the banks know exactly what they
'
re doing. A cus-
tomer of a bank dealing with the vice president of consumer
loans will feel much more gratified than dealing with a loan
clerk. The spouse of the vice president of consumer loans is
surely a greater booster of the bank than the spouse of the loan
clerk. In every possible way, the bank's standing in the commu-
nity is elevated by this liberality with its titles.
The strange thing is that the vice president in this instance
may have the same duties as the loan clerk. But which one has
the more positive self-image and the stronger self-motivation?
The answer is obvious.
As you move up the corporate ladder, you may have an
opportunity to in
fl
uence your company's policy in the use of
titles. There must be an orderly manner in their use. You don't
start a new employee with a super title for a routine clerical
position. The title is there for the employee to aspire to reach.
A company
'
s morale can be increased dramatically by a
more enlightened use of titles. Titles can go a long way toward
giving an employee a sense of well-being and of being appreci-
ated. The next time your company has a salary freeze, consider
giving a key employee a new title. You may be surprised by the
positive response. She already knows she won
'
t be getting a
raise, but the new title shows that you appreciate her work and
motivates her to keep doing a good job.
We all want to feel important, and so do our employees.
Let
'
s help them experience that feeling.
The Status Symbol
Another matter that falls in the motivation area is the status
symbol. Obviously, status symbols work or they wouldn'tfind
so widespread an application in the business world.
PAGE 116.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:10 PS
Is There Such a Thing as Motivation?117
The key to the executive washroom has almost become a
joke, but it is still an effective perk. The size of the of
fi
ce, the
luxuriousness of the carpeting, wooden versus steel furniture,
executive parking privileges, an executive dining room, com-
pany-paid club memberships, company-leased automobiles for
executive use, corporate aircraft - the proliferation of status
symbols is limited only by the expansiveness of the human
imagination.
All could be considered as attempts to inspire people to
raise their aspirations. These things are not important in them-
selves, but indicate that the employee is recognized as having
arrived at a certain level in the organization. They
'
re a lot more
important to those who don
'
t have them than to those who do.
There is an old saying that goes:''Why is it that most of the
people who say money isn't important are the ones who have
plenty of it?
''The same goes for status symbols.
A company should not become overly concerned about
status symbols, but if it makes them available to its employees,
it should not then criticize those same employees for longing
after these methods of''keeping score.''Actually, for most peo-
ple, it
'
s not the acquisition of the symbols that is important; it's
what they signify to other people. Most status symbols would
fall by the wayside if no one else knew you had achieved them.
It
'
sfine for you to want to attain certain status symbols, but
it
'
s important that you keep them in proper perspective. Don
'
t
let them become so critical to you that it'll tear you up if you
don
'
t attain them as quickly as you think you should.
You cannot substitute status symbols for a satisfactory sal-
ary program or a good management approach. Unfortunately,
some managers and even some companies think otherwise.
They treat people badly or pay them below the competition and
thenfigure they can make up for it with status symbols. This
attitude is an insult to the intelligence of the employee. If the
employee buys it, the insult is deserved.
Status symbols are the icing on the cake; they are not the
cake itself. When used with intelligence and some insight into
human behavior, status symbols can be a valuable tool.
PAGE 117.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:10 PS
118Working with People and Building Relationships
Need for Achievement
Many employees have the need for achievement. Usually, they
are employees whose needs of security, salary, working condi-
tions, status, rewards, and so forth have been met. Employees
who have this need usually want to be involved in decision mak-
ing, want to further develop their skills and talents,Þnd new
projects and tasks challenging, and want to advance in the orga-
nization. If you can satisfy these needs, you will not only have a
self-motivated employee working with you but a highly produc-
tive one as well.
Subjectivity of Motivation
Many new managers are highly motivated and that is great. But
they make the mistake of believing that their employees will be
motivated by what motivates them. That is not necessarily the
case. Keep in mind that very different things may motivate your
direct reports. That is OK. Try not to put your beliefs or value
system onto others. Also remember what motivates someone
today may not motivate the person next week. For example,
today you may be motivated by achievement. Next week, you
go out and buy a new house with a bigger mortgage. Now hav-
ing job securityÑa steady job with a good salaryÑwill motivate
you. Try not to make assumptions about what motivates your
team. You need toÞnd out and then act upon it.
PAGE 118.................11066$CH20 11-23-04 15:25:10 PS
21
The Generation Gap
First-time managers can be all ages.There are new managers
who are only in their twenties, many others in their thirties and
forties, and some in theirÞfties and sixties.
Three situations exist with regard to age differences be-
tween managers and the people reporting to them:
1. The mature manager supervises people who are younger.
2. The young manager supervises people who are older.
3. The mature or young manager leads a group of varied
ages, some younger, some older, and some of the same
generation.
The greatest conßicts seem to occur when a young manager
supervises older workers. For some reason, mature people seem
to resent working for a young manager. The line most often
usedÑand used to the point of being a cliche"Ñis that the young
manager is notÔÔdry behind the ears.ÕÕA large part of this prob-
lem is the attitude of the older employee, exacerbated by the
impetuousness of youth. Therefore, we will deal primarily with
the problems encountered by a young manager supervising a
workforce predominately older than himself or herself.
Your approach should be nice and easy. You want the staff
to think of you as mature beyond your years. If everything you
PAGE 119
119
.................11066$CH21 11-23-04 15:25:11 PS
120Working with People and Building Relationships
do creates that impression, sooner or later it becomes a fact in
everyone
'
s mind.
Take time making changes; go slow. Don't throw your
weight around by making decisions right and left, and too
quickly. Many older employees will read quick decisions as
being impulsive (even though they might not think the same
thing if done by an older manager). Quick action by an older
manager gives him the adjective''decisive.''The same action by
a young manager earns him the adjective''impetuous.''It's not
fair, but that is the way things are. What you need to do is give
people time to get used to your being there. So don
'
t build any
barriers that you later need to dismantle.
Mistakes to Avoid
Often, the new manager makes changes right away, avoids the
rule of incremental change, and uses all the newfound authority.
That approach upsets everyone, but is especially irritable to em-
ployees who have been around a while.
You don
'
t have to know the answer to every question
brought to you. Faking an answer when you don
'
t know it is a
mistake, and the experienced employee sees through it instantly.
If you can
'
t answer a question say,''I don't know, but I'llfind
out and get back to you.''This candor avoids the image of the
know-it-all kid. In the minds of many older employees, and
many not so old, you haven't lived long enough to have all the
answers.
Demonstrate early on and often that, like all good manag-
ers, you are concerned about the well-being of every person re-
porting to you. As a manager, you need to be a salesperson. Your
job is to sell your employees on the concept that they are all
fortunate to have you.
Strategies for the Young Manager
Make your older employees more comfortable with your super-
vision by delaying some of the commonsense and fairly obvious
PAGE 120.................11066$CH21 11-23-04 15:25:12 PS
The Generation Gap121
decisions you have to make as manager.Youknow that you can
make them almost immediately, but when you are new on a job,
occasionally postpone your decision when it will do no damage
to show your reßection on the matter.
For example, if an older employee brings you a problem
that he considers serious, but about which you feel you can
make an immediate decision, consider saying,ÔÔLet me think
about that for a while and I
Õ
ll get back to you tomorrow morn-
ing.
ÕÕThat way you indicate that you are thoughtful and want to
get all the facts, thus dispelling the young, know-it-all image.
You also show that you arenotimpetuous, which is a frequent
complaint about young managers.
Or, in the same situation, you might consider (with empha-
sis on the wordconsider) asking,ÔÔDo you have a recommenda-
tion?
ÕÕorÔÔWhat do you think ought to be done?ÕÕIf the person
bringing the problem strikes you as having common sense, give
it a try. But if the person is someone who builds you a clock
when you ask the time, you may be better off passing on this
idea.
There is some advantage in reviewing the past performance
appraisals of your direct reports when you take on a managerial
job, but remember to keep an open mind. The appraisals may be
generally correct, but we
Õ
ve all known managers with blind
spots about certain staff members. We have all heard about man-
agers who inherit an employee who supposedly never had an
original idea, but by using a different approach, the manager is
able to receive some good ideas from this person. So donÕt give
up on people too soon; you mayÞnd you have the ability to
reach them.
In addition, unless you already know your new, older staff
members personally, consider using last names only until they
suggest otherwise. Many mature employees consider younger
people too familiar or presumptuous. Of course, if you are being
promoted from within an of
Þ
ce where everyone usesÞrst
names, stick to the norm. However, if you
Õ
re coming in from
outside, try the Mrs. Jones or Mr. Smith approach until youÕre
fully accepted.
PAGE 121.................11066$CH21 11-23-04 15:25:13 PS
This page intentionally left blank
PARTFOUR
JOBDESCRIPTIONS,
P
ERFORMANCE
APPRAISALS,ANDSALARY
ADMINISTRATION
PAGE 123.................11066$PRT4 11-23-04 15:23:36 PS
This page intentionally left blank
22
Writing Job Descriptions
Job descriptions, performance appraisals,and salary administra-
tion are valuable functions that every company performs, either
formally or informally. But if the people administering them are
not properly instructed in the purpose of these functions, they
can be seriously mismanaged.
We need to speak of these functions from a conceptual
viewpoint. Discussion of precise details (such as the forms used)
is unfeasible because of the great variety in approaches that exist
between industries, and even between companies within indi-
vidual industries.
Even companies without a formal program use these tech-
niquesÑalthough often poorly. Informality is more likely to
occur in smaller companies that are controlled by family mem-
bers or by one or two people at the top. These individuals may
feel theyÕre being equitable and that all their employees are sat-
isÞed with the fair treatment theyÕre receiving. That may indeed
be the case, but the chances for it are remote. Even without a
formal program, someone in charge decides which jobs are most
important (job evaluation), makes a judgment on how well peo-
ple are doing (performance appraisal), and decides how much
each employee is going to be paid (salary administration). So
even if the motto isÔÔWeÕre all like one happy family, and as
papa I make all the decisions on the basis of whatÕs fair,ÕÕthe
PAGE 125
125
.................11066$CH22 11-23-04 15:25:15 PS
126Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
company does have a program
Ñ
with all the idiosyncratic biases
of theÔÔpapaÕÕthrown in.
Job Description Basics
Most companies use job descriptions, although they may range
from very informal to highly structured descriptions. A job de-
scription describeswhatis done in varying detail, and it usually
includes hierarchical relationships.
Some companies write their own job descriptions; others
use a system designed by a management consulting service
whereby some company people are trained to write the descrip-
tions and others are taught how to score the jobs to rank them
within the organization.
A job description typically tells what is done, the educa-
tional background required, how much experience is needed to
perform the work competently, what the speciÞc accountability
of the job is, and the extent of supervisory or management re-
sponsibility. The description may also spell out short-term and
long-term objectives and detail the relationships of people in-
volved, including what position to which each job reports. It will
often mention the personal contacts the job requires, such as
with the public or governmental agencies.
The Three-Tier Approach
When writing job descriptions, youÕllÞnd it helpful to use the
ÔÔ
three-tier approach.
ÕÕIn this approach you specify, as men-
tioned previously, what the person will need to do. This is tier
one: the technical skills and knowledge required.
Then you add a behavior-based tier to the description. This
tier describes the way the person will need to act or behave while
performing the job duties. For example, the behaviors needed in
tier two might include having good follow-through, being inno-
vative and creative, or showing a commitment to quality.
The third tier is the interpersonal skills tier. Here the re-
quirements for a particular job might be being a good listener,
being a team player, or accepting criticism from others.
PAGE 126.................11066$CH22 11-23-04 15:25:15 PS
Writing Job Descriptions127
Many job descriptions only focus on the technical aspects of
the job, which is tier one. However, the behavioral and interper-
sonal ones are just as important. In fact, most experienced man-
agers say that behavioral and interpersonal competencies are
greater predictors of an individual
Õ
s success on the job. When
writing job descriptions make sure that each one has three tiers
to it.
Job Scores
At some point, youÕll write a job description, either for yourself
or for some of the people reporting to you. Some companies
allow the description to be written by the employee and then
reviewed and corrected, if necessary, by the manager. It is best
if the description is a joint effort by the employee and the man-
ager so that there is agreement as to what the job entails. This
avoids disagreements down the road.
A committee speci
Þ
cally trained for that purpose usually
does the scoring of the job. Often, the HR department does it.
We will not discuss how, because that varies by company. The
points usually arrived at will determine a salary range for each
job, and the range may go from new and inexperienced to a fully
seasoned professional on the job. If the midpoint salary of a job
is considered 100 percent, then the bottom of the range could
be 75 percent or 80 percent of that and the maximum for the
outstanding performance would be 120 to 125 percent of that
midpoint.
Since everyone knows that the score determines salary
range, the score becomes crucial in many peopleÕs minds. There-
fore, there is a tendency for people to overwrite job descriptions
in order to enhance the salary range. Filling a job description
with such boilerplate copy usually works to a disadvantage. If a
description is puffed up, it forces the committee to wade
through the hyperbole to get to the facts. Job evaluation commit-
tees know exactly what the writers are doing, so the puf
Þ
ng up
has the opposite effect. On the other hand, job descriptions that
are lean and to the point aid the committee in doing its work.
So, if you write a job description, avoid the temptation to load it
up. The scoring committee will resent your doing it.
PAGE 127.................11066$CH22 11-23-04 15:25:16 PS
23
Doing Performance
Appraisals
Performance appraisals can beas informal as telling someone
ÔÔYouÕve done a nice job,ÕÕor as elaborate as a full-scale written
report, complete with a long follow-up interview with the em-
ployee.
Clearly, all of us like to know how weÕre doing. One em-
ployee will say,ÔÔWorking in this ofÞce is like working in the
dark.ÕÕAnother will say,ÔÔOld Fussbudget may be tough, but
you always know where you stand.ÕÕItÕs meant as a compliment.
A formal system of performance appraisalÑfor example,
one or two planned contacts with the employee each year for the
speciÞc purpose of discussingÔÔhow youÕre doingÕÕÑis prefera-
ble to the informal method, which is often equivalent to doing
nothing.
Some managers are convinced that they communicate ef-
fectively with their employees and that these employees know
exactly how they stand. An interview with the employees, how-
ever, will indicate that communication is one of the greatest
needs they feel.
Many managers still approach their supervisory role with
the mottoÔÔIf I donÕt hear anything, I know IÕm doing okay.ÕÕ
That doesnÕt cut it. Top-echelon managers often avoid discussing
all performances except those that require emergency action.
PAGE 128
128
.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:18 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals129
They feel that performance appraisals are necessary for the rank
andÞle but members of the executive team are above such
things. The rationale is that these of
Þ
cials are clearly in control
of the situation and of themselves and donÕt need to be told how
they
Õ
re doing. Just the opposite is true. Members of the executive
team often have an even greater need to be told how their superi-
ors view their performance.
Legal Requirement
In organizations withÞfty or more regular employees (this may
vary by state and the nature of your business), it is a legal re-
quirement to keep accurate and up-to-date records on every em-
ployee
Õ
s performance, no matter what level he or she is. It is also
a legal requirement that a formal interview take place at least
once a year. The performance appraisal form is considered to be
a legal document. Often in employment cases that go to court,
theÞrst thing the judge or referee will ask for is the history of
performance appraisal. Performance appraisals are your organi-
zation
Õ
s greatest liability when they are not done, when they are
done inaccurately, and when they are done with bias.
If an employee ever tells youÔÔI donÕt think soÕÕduring an
appraisal meeting or after having reviewed his appraisal form
or after receiving his rating, you have not done your job well.
There should never be any surprises at performance appraisal
time. If you have done your job of communicating constantly
throughout the year and have continually told your employees
how they are doing, you will never get that surprised response.
There are no speciÞc rules for how often to review perform-
ance. Many managers have informal performance review meet-
ings throughout the year just to ensure that there are no
surprises. This is calledperformance coaching. Performance coach-
ing is a regularly scheduled discussion between the manager
and the employee to review the level of performance being met.
Performance coaching is informal, can be documented if the em-
ployee wants it to be, and no forms are used. This type of coach-
ing allows you to modify goals or set new ones, and to add or
eliminate tasks or assignments.
PAGE 129.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:19 PS
130Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
Some companies require their managers to have quarterly
sessions to avoid any surprises managers may get from their em-
ployees. A synonym for performance appraisal isperformance
review
. If you think about it, this means that the once-a-year ses-
sion is just a review of what has already been communicated
throughout the year.
A ManagerÕs Responsibilities
As a manager, you have a responsibility to follow some basic
guidelines when writing and conducting performance apprais-
als. Here are the seven tenets of performance appraisal:
1. Set goals and objectives so employees know what is ex-
pected of them.
2. Provide training and coaching to help employees suc-
ceed.
3. Provide ongoing feedback on performance.
4. Prepare the paperwork for the review.
5. Conduct the review in a timely manner.
6. Understand and communicate the review
Õ
s importance.
7. Be thorough and base the review on the employeeÕs per-
formance, not your own attitude.
The Appraisal Form
A formal system should be designed in such a way that it con-
siders as many elements of the job as possible. The manager
should be forced to make some judgment about each of the im-
portant factors. This means,Þrst of all, that the manager must
be knowledgeable about the job and the performance. That is
why the appraisal should be done at the level closest to the job
being reviewed. A manager three levels above the position in
question can
Õ
t handle the judgments as well as the manager in
daily contact with the employee being appraised. It can be re-
viewed by higher-level management, but the appraisal will be
PAGE 130.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:19 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals131
more accurate when done by someone in daily contact with
the job.
Here are some items that appear on a typical performance
appraisal form. There may be anywhere from three to ten de-
grees of performance efÞciency for each category, the extremes
beingÔÔunsatisfactoryÕÕon the one end andÔÔoutstandingÕÕon the
other.
Volumes or production levels
Thoroughness
Accuracy (may be identiÞed as error rate)
Initiative/self-starting
Attitude
Ability to learn
Cooperation/ability to work with others
Attendance and punctuality
You can probably think of other factors applying to your
own business that ought to be included. Some systems may use
a numeric weighting for each of the factors, arriving at aÞnal
rating that will be given to the employee. The entire form be-
comes a part of the employeeÕs personnelÞle. The ranking
scheme might be something like this:
80 to 100 points: Outstanding
60 to 80 points: Commendable
50 to 60 points: Satisfactory
40 to 50 points: Needs improvement
Less than 40 points: Unsatisfactory
The ranges can be narrower or broader if your system re-
quires it. You
Õ
ll note that in this example, 50 to 60 points gener-
ates a performance description ofÔÔsatisfactory.ÕÕIn some
companies, this would be entitledÔÔaverage performance.ÕÕSatis-
factoryis the better word. Most people resent being called aver-
age
Ñ
they consider it demeaning. The wordssatisfactoryand
needs improvementare more useful thanaverageandbelow average.
PAGE 131.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:19 PS
132Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
There are millions of average people in this world, but it is prob-
ably rare toÞnd a satisfactory employee who thought he or she
was just average.
Let
Õ
s make another point about performance appraisals.
Some managers have a rating in their mind, and they work back-
ward to get it. You
Õ
reÔÔhorsing the systemÕÕif you do that. ItÕs
usually done because the manager doesnÕt want to tell an em-
ployee that he needs improvement. But when you delay a tough
decision, you
Õ
re setting yourself up for much greater problems
down the road.
Many appraisal systems have done away with terms such as
initiative
,works well with others,team player, and so forth, only to
base the review and theÞnal rating on how well the individual
has met the goals set for him or her. The more objective the
system is, the fairer employees feel it is.
The Interview
The interview with the employee about the performance ap-
praisal becomes crucial. You should plan to hold it at a time
when you
Õ
ll be unhurried and not likely to be interrupted.
Allow yourself as much time as is needed to cover all facets of
the job. Answer all questions. Listen to everything the employee
wants to say. Your willingness to hear your subordinate out may
be as important as the discussion itself. Employees are so used
to dealing with managers who behave as though everything is
an emergency that, when given time to talk to their superior
about their own dreams and aspirations, they may feel uncom-
fortable.
The conversation with your direct report is so important
that you should avoid being interrupted. This should include
even calls from the president of the company. The president
should be informed that you are in the middle of a performance
appraisal interview and let her decide if she still needs to talk to
you at that time. Of course, anyone in any organization can be
interrupted for emergencies, and, if that is the case, let your em-
ployee know what is happening and why you need to interrupt
the appraisal meeting. It is quite disconcerting to be telling an-
PAGE 132.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:20 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals133
other person about your ambitions and feelings only to have the
other break the spell by taking telephone calls looking at incom-
ing e-mails.
During the performance appraisal interview, you should di-
rect the tone of the discussion but not dominate it. You deÞnitely
have a message to convey. You want to go over each performance
appraisal factor with your employee. You want to make known
what you consider to be your employee
Õ
s strengths on the job
and what areas require some improvement. You
Õ
ll seldom get
disagreement on the areas you designate as strengths. But
you
Õ
re likely to encounter disagreement when you start discuss-
ing weaknesses. And this is where you have to allow employees
to express their own feelings.
Some people will never hear anything positive if it follows
something they consider negative, such as an area thatÔÔneeds
improvement.
ÕÕAs a result, never start off a performance ap-
praisal meeting with anything that might be construed by the
team member as negative. Start with a couple positives.
Do you have documentation that indicates where the em-
ployee is weak and where improvement is needed? Your case
is much stronger if buttressed by hard evidence. Production or
quality records are much more convincing than a managerÕs in-
tuition. When you come up against the team member
Õ
s disagree-
ment, that difference of opinion is important and should be
discussed. It
Õ
s possible that youÕre wrong, but you wonÕtbeif
the facts can be documented.
Here is an experiment you mayÞnd helpful in getting staff
to understand performance appraisals. Before sitting down to
make your Solomon-like judgments, give all the members of
your staff a blank form and ask them to evaluate their own per-
formance. Then compare their appraisals with yours. You will
usuallyÞnd that their ratings are lower than yours. Many stud-
ies have shown that managers rate their direct reports higher
than the direct reports rate themselves. The reason I suggest that
you do this is because it allows you and your team members to
discuss both of your views of each factor rated. You willÞnd
that your staff will learn a great deal about performance ap-
praisal from the experiment, and you will learn a great deal
more about the people you manage.
PAGE 133.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:20 PS
134Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
Too many leaders will be thorough in pointing out the areas
in which the employee should show improvement, but they will
not go far enough. If theyÕre going to tell the employee where
job performance is not up to expectations, then they must also
tellhowit can be improved. This needs to be thought through in
great detail before the interview is conducted.
The Agenda
This brings us to the preparation time that is essential to a suc-
cessful performance appraisal interview. You should sit down
and decide what points you want to cover in the conversation.
You might even prepare a brief outline of what you want to dis-
cuss. It
Õ
s possible that the performance appraisal form your
company uses may trigger all the proper thoughts in your mind.
However, you must anticipate that it will not. You
Õ
ll look foolish
if you fail to cover all the bases and have to ask the employee to
come back into your of
Þ
ce a day later to review some important
point that you forgot.
Make an outline of the signiÞcant items you should cover.
Here are some questions you might ask as you prepare the
outline:
What areas of this employeeÕs performance or attitude
should you mention?
What areas not covered in the performance appraisal do
you need to mention?
What are some of the items of personal interest about this
employee that you should bring up?
What questions should you ask this employee that are
likely to generate some conversation and opinions about
the work?
How can you help this employee do a better job? What are
the areas in which this employee will be self-motivated?
How can you let this employee know he or she is impor-
tant to you personally, not just for the work performed?
How does this employeeÞt into the companyÕs future
PAGE 134.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:20 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals135
plans? Is this person promotable? What can you do to
help?
This is the type of self-examination you should go through
before beginning the session with the employee. A few minutes
spent preparing for the conversation will greatly increase the
success ratio of your performance appraisal interviews.
The Satisfactory Employee
Many managers prepare thoroughly for the interview with the
problem employee. They know it might get sticky and they
'
d
better see to it that theirflanks are protected. You should be just
as thorough in preparing for the interview with the satisfactory
employee. Occasionally, you
'
ll be surprised by the outstanding
staff member who
'
ll turn a conversation you thought was going
to be all sweetness and light into a real donnybrook.
As you spend more years in management, you
'
llfind that
the satisfactory employee generally uses this interview to unload
some of the problems that have been festering. The problems
vary with the situation. Here are some examples:
''I'm not advancing fast enough.''
''My salary is not fair for the work I do.''
''My coworkers are not performing up to standards.''
''
As manager, you don
'
t pay enough attention to subordi-
nates who are getting the job done.''
''
Good performance is not appreciated or recognized.
''
You should welcome such input from your satisfactory em-
ployees, even though you risk hearing what you don't want to
hear. Let
'
s face it, many employees will tell you only what they
think you want to hear; but a rare and precious few will tell the
truth, and these you must listen to carefully. Don
'
t fall into the
''
shoot the messenger
''syndrome. Although the news a messen-
ger brings you makes you unhappy, the fault is not with the
messenger; punishing the carrier won
'
t change the truth of the
PAGE 135.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:20 PS
136Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
message carried. Ignorance may be bliss, but it can be fatal in a
managerial career.
Of course, the information youÕre receiving may not exactly
re
ß
ect the facts. You
Õ
re receiving it through the carrier
Õ
sÞlters.
Nevertheless, that doesnÕt make it any less valuable. You may
not have been around long enough to know how to sort out what
is important and what is window dressing. If the satisfactory
employee believes itÕs important enough to bring to your atten-
tion, then you ought to listen to it. Besides, this employee surely
knows you prefer a trouble-free interview to oneÞlled with
problems, so you know the matter would not have come up un-
less the employee felt strongly about it.
It
Õ
s possible that you may occasionally have a mischief-
maker on your hands, but these people are usually not your
satisfactory employees.
An Open-Door Policy
ÔÔMy door is always open.ÕÕHow many times have you said it
yourself? It doesn
Õ
t take the employees long toÞnd out what the
statement really means.
ÔÔMy door is always open, as long as you donÕt come in here
to tell me about any new problems.ÕÕThatÕs one possible mean-
ing.ÔÔMy door is always open, but donÕt come in to talk about
money or a better job.
ÕÕThatÕs another.ÔÔMy door is always open,
but I don
Õ
t want to hear about your personal problems.
ÕÕYour
employees know what you really mean or they soonÞgure it
out.
Then there are the managers who are likely to say, or think,
ÔÔI donÕt want my people to like me. I just want them to respect
me.
ÕÕDonÕt youÞnd it easier to respect people you like?
Your performance appraisal interviews should encourage
your employees to say whatever they have in mind. The more
open the communication between both parties, the better chance
that you
Õ
ll have a satisfactory working relationship.
Subjectivity Factors
Even though we need to be as objective as we possibly can and
treat our employees fairly, we are still human. Being human, we
PAGE 136.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:21 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals137
allow biases to creep into our evaluations of others. For example,
some managers are guilty of theÔÔhalo effect.ÕÕLetÕs say you are
evaluating an employee onÞve different goals that she is sup-
posed to accomplish. Let
Õ
s say one of the goals is reducing the
department
Õ
s error rate by 5 percent. This goal means more to
you than anything else. If the employee accomplishes this goal,
you give her a halo, like an angel has. In your mind, the em-
ployee can do no wrong. You are blinded by the halo. When the
halo effect occurs, you overrate everything else that the em-
ployee does. Halo effects occur everywhere in life. Let
Õ
s use a
school example. If a teacherÕs favorite subject is science and a
child is great in science, the teacher puts a halo on that childÕs
head and gives him a higher rating in math, science, and history
because she was biased by his science aptitude.
The opposite of the halo effect is called theÔÔhorns effect.ÕÕ
If the employee does not reduce the error rate, she gets horns
over her head instead. Everything she does, even if it is great,
will be diminished in the eyes of the manager because the em-
ployee has the horns.
Then there is theÔÔrecency effect.ÕÕAs managersÑand as
human beings
Ñ
we tend to remember what has happened more
recently. So, if employees really care about their appraisal and
they know it is coming up on June 1, they will do great work
during April and May. In order to avoid this effect, you need
to document and keep thorough records throughout the rating
period.
Another managerial subjectivity factor is theÔÔstrictness ef-
fect.
ÕÕMany managers believe that an employee can always im-
prove and that no employee is perfect. Most people would all
agree with that attitude. But many of those same managers
would never rate anyone in the top category (for example,ÔÔex-
ceeds expectations,
ÕÕor number 5). This makes no sense and can
be demoralizing. If team members have exceeded their goals and
performed at an incredibly high level, why not give them the
top rating? These managers would probably not give the top
rating even to Michael Jordan, Wayne Gretsky, or Martina Na-
vratilova if they were employees of theirs. YouÕve probably seen
or heard of cases where a child will get a top grade, say 99 per-
cent, on a test and a parent will ask,ÔÔWhat happened?ÕÕinstead
PAGE 137.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:21 PS
138Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
of praising the accomplishment. These parents obviously believe
in the strictness effect. They think they are pushing their chil-
dren on to greater achievement by insisting on perfection, but
can you imagine what a demoralizing impact this can have on a
child?
There is one more subjectivity factor or bias that can creep
into performance appraisals. Many new managers or managers
in general who are not familiar with their employees are guilty
ofÔÔcentral tendency.ÕÕLetÕs say your review system hasÞve rat-
ing categories
Ñ
1 through 5, with 5 being the highest. If a man-
ager is not sure which category to put an employee in because
he has not done his homework of setting goals, doing quarterly
reviews, documenting performance, and so forth, the manager
dumps the employee into the middle category. This is not fair
because that employee may belong in a different rating category.
The Use of Behavioral Comments
When you write comments on the appraisal form, try to use be-
havioral examples that demonstrate why you rated someone as
you did. For example, do not say,ÔÔJames doesnÕt care about his
work.
ÕÕInstead say, on January 8, February 4, and so forth,
ÔÔ
James handed in reports after the agreed upon deadline.ÕÕ
Also, be very careful about the comments that you use. Re-
member that this is a legal document and you do not want to
be open to a lawsuit. There are many documented incidents of
incredibly tasteless and legally troublesome comments written
by managers on appraisal forms. Make sure you never write a
comment like any of the following examples:
ÔÔThe wheel is turning but the hamster is dead.ÕÕ
ÔÔOne neuron short of a synapse.ÕÕ
ÔÔThe gates are down, the lights are working, but the train
is nowhere to be found.
ÕÕ
She has a full six-pack, but she does not have that plastic
thing to hold it all together.
ÕÕ
ÔÔBright as Alaska in December.ÕÕ
PAGE 138.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:22 PS
Doing Performance Appraisals139
Post Appraisal
When you have completed the appraisal interview, it is a good
idea to review how you did so you can improve and do better
on the next interview. Here is a checklist that will help you out.
Ask yourself if you:
Explained the purpose of the interview?
Found out the employee's views and feelings on his per-
formance?
Allowed the employee to do the majority of the talking?
Pointed out where the employee is doing well?
Offered suggestions for improving performance and
asked the employee for suggestions (if necessary)?
Put the employee at ease by creating a relaxed environ-
ment?
Agreed on action plans for improving performance (if
necessary)?
Set a time frame for improving performance (if neces-
sary)?
Closing Thought
Performance appraisals are hard work. You need to keep accu-
rate documentation, communicate constantly throughout the
year, follow legal guidelines,fill out the forms correctly, conduct
an effective interview, and then examine how the entire process
went. The appraisal process is also quite time consuming. But if
you do a great job here, you will have employees who know
what is expected of them because they have your assurance that
you will be working with them to help them succeed. Perform-
ance appraisals
 - 
if they are done well, taken seriously by you,
and are fair
 - 
can be a great motivator for each of your em-
ployees.
PAGE 139.................11066$CH23 11-23-04 15:25:22 PS
24
Salary Administration
It should be obviousthat job descriptions, performance apprais-
als, and salary administration allÞt together in one overall plan.
They are designed to provide accurate descriptions of what peo-
ple do, give fair evaluations of their performance, and pay them
a salary that is reasonable for their efforts. All these factors must
bear a proper relationship to one another and make a contribu-
tion to the organizationÕs overall goals.
If you have a job evaluation program, you probably also
have salary ranges for each position in the organization. As a
manager, you work within that scale.
It makes sense to have a minimum and a maximum salary
for each position. You canÕt allow a situation to develop in which
an individual could stay on the same job for years and receive a
salary out of all proportion to what the task is worth. ItÕs impor-
tant to make certain that long-term employees are aware of this
situation, especially as they get close to the salaryÔÔlidÕÕon the
job. For most well-qualiÞed people this is not a problem, because
theyÕll usually be promoted to another job with a larger salary
range. However, in your managerial career, you will encounter
long-term employees who remain in the same jobs. Perhaps they
donÕt want to be promoted. Perhaps they are at their level of
competence and cannot handle the next position up the ladder.
These people need to know that there is a limit to what the
job is worth to the organization. You have to tell these individu-
PAGE 140
140
.................11066$CH24 11-23-04 15:25:22 PS
Salary Administration141
als that once they are at the maximum, the only way they can
receive more money is if the salary ranges are changed on all
jobs. This may happen, for example, through a cost-of-living in-
crease that raises the ranges on all jobs by a certain percent.
Should that occur, you would have a little room for awarding
salary increases.
Nonetheless, long-term employees who stay in the same job
for an extended period of time and who are at maximum salary
level need to have continued incentive. They are capable and
should be kept on the job. Many companies have solved this
problem by instituting annualÞnancial awards (such as annual,
increasing cash stipends) related to years of service. This keeps
Þ
nancial payments out of the job evaluation system and yet re-
wards the faithful long-term employee.
The salary administration program for all other employees
usually includes a salary recommendation within a range of
pay increases, based on the kind of performance appraisal the
employee has received. Since the two procedures have such an
impact on each other, some companies separate the salary rec-
ommendation from the performance appraisal rating. In that
way, a manager
Õ
s idea of what a salary increase ought to be is
not allowed to determine the performance appraisal given. If as
manager you make both determinations at the same time, you
Õ
ll
be tempted to take the answer you want and work backward to
justify it. It remains dif
Þ
cult to separate salary consideration
from the performance appraisal, but completing the procedures
several weeks or months apart may help.
So let
Õ
s assume your company does have salary ranges for
each job and there is some limitation on what you can recom-
mend. No doubt the salary ranges overlap. For example, a vet-
eran employee on a lower-level job could be paid more than a
newer employee on a higher-level job. An outstanding perfor-
mer at one level could be paid more than a mediocre worker one
level up.
Equity
As the manager, you
Õ
re concerned with equity. You should re-
view the salaries of all the people who report to you. You might
PAGE 141.................11066$CH24 11-23-04 15:25:23 PS
142Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
begin by listing all the jobs in your department, from top to bot-
tom. You might then write the monthly salary next to each name.
Based on what you know about the job performances, do the
salaries look reasonable? Is there any salary that looks out
of line?
Another method you can use is to rank the jobs in the order
of importance to the department, as you perceive the situation.
How does that compare with top management's evaluation of
the importance of the jobs? If there are differences you can't rec-
oncile or accept, then you'd better schedule a session with your
immediate superior to see what can be done about it.
In this matter of rankings, appraisals, and salaries, a word
of caution is in order. This is an extremely important point. Rec-
ognize
 - 
and be willing to admit to yourself
 - 
that you like some
employees more than others. You
'
re conning yourself if you
think you like them all equally. Certain personality types are
more agreeable to you than others. Try as honestly as you can to
keep these personality preferences from unduly influencing the
decisions you make about appraisals, salaries, and promotions.
In recommending a salary increase for several employees,
you
'
ll have some tricky decisions to make. If the company makes
all its salary adjustments at the same time each year, then it
'
s
fairly easy to compare one recommendation against another.
You can make all your decisions at one time and see how they
stack up with one another. But if salary decisions occur through-
out the year
 - 
for example, if they are tied to the worker
'
s em-
ployment anniversary
 - 
it
'
s more dif
fi
cult to have all the
decisions spread out in front of you.
Although maintaining equity in this type of situation is dif-
fi
cult, it is possible if you keep adequate records. Retain copies
of all your job descriptions, performance appraisals, and salary
recommendations. Some companies encourage supervisors not
to keep such records and to depend on the personnel depart-
ment
'
s records. However, maintaining your own set is worth the
effort; you
'
ll then have the records when you want them. Keep
these records in afile that is locked, and do not allow any em-
ployee access to thefile, including the secretary or assistant who
works closely with you.
PAGE 142.................11066$CH24 11-23-04 15:25:23 PS
Salary Administration143
The Salary Recommendation
In making a salary recommendation, be as sure as you possibly
can that it's a reasonable amount. It should be neither too low
nor too high and at the same timefit within the framework of
the performance the company is receiving from that person. An
increase that is too high, for example, could create an''encore''
problem. Anything less than the same amount offered the next
time around may be considered an insult by the employee. How-
ever, an unusually large increase coming at the time of a promo-
tion doesn
'
t run that same encore danger because it can be tied
to a speci
fi
c, nonrepeating situation. In that case, you must ex-
plain to the employee why the increase is so large and why it
doesn
'
t create a precedent for future increases.
Since a small increase can be considered an insult, you'd
perhaps do better to recommend no increase at all rather than a
pittance. Sometimes a small increase is a cop-out, and is given
because the supervisor lacks the courage to recommend no in-
crease. But this only postpones the inevitable reckoning; you are
better off confronting the situation immediately and honestly.
When considering the amount of the raise, it
'
s essential that
you not allow the employee's need to be an important factor.
This may seem inhumane, but consider these points. If you
based salary increases on need, the employee in the most des-
perate state of need would be the highest paid. If that person
were also the best performer, you'd have no problem. But what
if the employee's performance was merely average?
The common thread that must run through salary adminis-
tration is merit. Basing your salary recommendations on who
has been with the company the longest, who has the greatest
number of children, or whose mother is ill moves you away
from your responsibilities as a salary administrator and puts
you in the charity business. If you have direct reports withfi-
nancial problems, you can be helpful as a friend, a good lis-
tener, or a source of information about where to go for
professional assistance, but you can'tusethesalarydollars
you're charged with as a method of solving the social problems
of your direct reports.
PAGE 143.................11066$CH24 11-23-04 15:25:24 PS
144Descriptions, Appraisals, and Salary
When you
'
re making a salary adjustment for an employee
who
'
s having difficulty, there is a great temptation to add a few
more dollars than you would otherwise. You must resist that
temptation and base your decision strictly on the performance
of the individual employee.
PAGE 144.................11066$CH24 11-23-04 15:25:24 PS
PARTFIVE
IMPROVING AND
DEVELOPINGYOURSELF
PAGE 145.................11066$PRT5 11-23-04 15:23:38 PS
This page intentionally left blank
25
Having Emotional
Intelligence
There is a relatively new management conceptcalledemotional
intelligencethat is causing quite a stir. Social scientists and psy-
chologists areÞnding that managers and leaders who have high
levels of emotional intelligence, or a high emotional quotient
(EQ), seem to do much better in their managerial and leadership
roles than their counterparts who have average or low EQs.
These experts have also found that individuals high in EQ expe-
rience more career success, build stronger personal relation-
ships, enjoy better health due to better stress management
techniques, motivate themselves and others to achieve greater
accomplishments, and have the capacity to trust others and be
trusted. According to these same experts, traditional IQ seems
to have no bearing on managerial success.
History of EQ
The concept of emotional intelligence was made popular in the
1995 bookEmotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ,
written by Dr. Daniel Goleman. Since the bookÕs publication,
there have been many articles and books written on the topic. In
PAGE 147
147
.................11066$CH25 11-23-04 15:25:25 PS
148Improving and Developing Yourself
addition, practically every well-respected management-training
program now has a module or two on how to be emotionally
intelligent.
IQ
IQ, or intellectual quotient, comprises competencies quite differ-
ent from those of EQ. People high in IQ have great mathematical
abilities. They also have extensive understanding of vocabulary
and language, test high in abstract reasoning and spatial abili-
ties, and have excellent comprehension skills. For the most part,
IQ level is determined at birth. That is, there is a large genetic
predisposition to how high one's IQ will be. Over the years, IQ
scores can change, but probably not more thanfifteen points
on the average. On the other hand, emotional intelligence is a
learned behavior. An EQ score can change dramatically over
the years.
EQ
Having emotional intelligence basically means that you have
emotional smarts. If you can answer yes to the following ques-
tions, you probably have high levels of emotional intelligence.
Can you walk into a room and sense the mood?
Can you recognize the emotional states of others?
Do you know when you are becoming emotional and can
you control it if you wanted to?
Under stressful and chaotic situations, can you evoke pos-
itive emotions in others?
Can you and do you express to others how you are feeling
and what your emotions are?
These EQ abilities seem to be very close to the supportive
behaviors we mentioned earlier. EQ is a combination of having
people skills and knowing a lot about yourself.
PAGE 148.................11066$CH25 11-23-04 15:25:26 PS
Having Emotional Intelligence149
The EQ Test
Let
Õ
s have a little fun now. Below are ten items that determine
EQ levels. For each item, rate your own ability on a scale of 1 to
10, with 10 being the highest. Be honest if you want to get an
accurate score.
1. When in stressful situations, IÞnd ways to relax.
2. I can stay calm when others verbally attack me.
3. I can easily identify my own mood shifts.
4. It is easy toÔÔcome backÕÕafter a major setback.
5. I have effective interpersonal skills like listening, giving
feedback, and motivating others.
6. It is easy for me to show empathy to others.
7. I know when others are distressed or upset.
8. Even when working on a boring project, I can show
high levels of energy.
9. I just seem to know what others are thinking.
10. I use positive, instead of negativeÔÔself-talk.ÕÕ
A score above 85 means you are already emotionally intelli-
gent. A score above 75 means you are well on your way to be-
coming emotionally intelligent.
EQ and Managing
No doubt you can see the connection between EQ and being
a successful manager. Managing people is very different from
managing tasks and projects. Having the EQ skills of recogniz-
ing your own feelings and the feeling of others, being able to
express your emotions appropriately, being self-motivated and
getting others to be, and being able to deal with stress, tension,
and chaos and helping others do the same, mark the excellent
manager of todayÕs workplace.
PAGE 149.................11066$CH25 11-23-04 15:25:27 PS
26
Developing a Positive
Self-Image
Having a realistic opinionof your own ability is not an ego prob-
lem if itÕs a realistic assessment of your situation.
People can get awfully mixed up in dealing with this ego
thing. There are always people around who want you to feel
guilty if you have a healthy opinion of yourself. Rather, it is
ÔÔlove your neighbor as yourself.ÕÕThis implies that your capac-
ity to love your neighbor is determined by your capacity to love
yourself. This principle applies to management, too.
Many excellent books have been written on the subject of
self-image, and they have important concepts in them for the
manager. Here are a few basics that will help you in your mana-
gerial career.
The fact is, we fall or rise by our self-image. If we have a
low opinion of ourselves and believe weÕre going to fail, our
subconscious will try to deliver that result to us. Conversely, if
we have a high opinion of ourselves and think weÕre going to
succeed, our chances for success are greatly increased. That is
an oversimpliÞcation, but it conveys the thought. If you think
success, if you look successful, if youÕre conÞdent of being suc-
cessful, you greatly increase your chances to be successful. ItÕs
primarily a matter of attitude. If you believe that you are a fail-
ure, that is what youÕre likely to be.
PAGE 150
150
.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:30 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image151
Closely related to this is the management concept called the
self-ful
Þ
lling prophecy.Basically, the prophecy states that we treat
people the way we are told they behave or the way we think they
will behave. Much research has been done with managers and
the self-ful
fi
lling prophecy. Here is an example of one research
study:
Two managers, both considered to be excellent, were told
that they each would be leading a new project team. One man-
ager (X) was told he had the best employees in the company.
The other manager (Y) was told he had''average''employees. In
reality, they both had average employees. Separately, they were
given all the details of their project. Unknown to them, both
managers had the exact same instructions and were working on
the same project. After two weeks, which manager do you think
had better results at the completion of the project? Right. It was
manager X. He believed he had the best employees. Thus he
pushed them more, delegated more to them, and expected much
more from them. Be careful that you do not fall prey to the self-
ful
fi
lling prophecy either about others or yourself.
To reinforce a successful attitude, you need some success
along the way. Now that you've moved into yourfirst manage-
rial position, every success you have will serve as a building
block to further achievements.
It should be obvious that you can't substitute feelings of
success for actual accomplishments. You can't have the appear-
ance without any substance. That would be a sham. You'll soon
be found out, and to your own disadvantage.
An Impression of Arrogance
One of the most serious problems observed in newly appointed
young managers is the impression they give of arrogance. Be
careful that you don
'
t mishandle your feelings of success so that
you are misconstrued as being arrogant. A manager can feel
pride in having been elevated into the managerial ranks without
appearing cocky. Rather, the impression conveyed should be
one of quiet confidence.
PAGE 151.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:30 PS
152Improving and Developing Yourself
Do you suspect that there are people in your organization
who don
Õ
t believe you were the right selection and whoÕd de-
light in your failure? That is not only possible; itÕs quite likely.
An appearance that can be construed as arrogance is going to
convince these people that theyÕre correct in their assessment of
you.
Strategies for Improving Self-Image
Anyone can work on improving his or her self-image. Here are
three methods that have proven successful. TheÞrst method is
calledvisualization.You try to visualize doing something that is
important to you. It may be closing a big contract, getting a
round of applause for conducting a seminar, or getting that
smile of affection from a loved one for showing support. You
may want to visualize getting your point across with your CEO,
or disciplining an employee, or doing a presentation in front of
the board of directors. What happens in visualization, after peri-
ods of practice, is that these visual images become part of how
we view our actions and ourselves. The brain literally records
these visual pictures for later use.
The next method is calledwin-win. In this method, you give
people a lot of positive feedback and work hard to help others
succeed. This makes you feel better about their work as well as
your abilities as a manager.
The last technique ispositive self-talk. It is estimated that we
send ourselves more than 1,000 messages a day. If you want to
build up your self-image, make sure that these messages are
positive ones. The more you do this, the more the brain builds a
positive sense of self. Examples of positive self-talk include the
following:
ÔÔI am improving my management skills each day.ÕÕ
ÔÔI can handle this.ÕÕ
ÔÔI made a mistake but I will do better next time.ÕÕ
Positive self-talk is like having a CD playing in your mind
that sends you only positive messages.
PAGE 152.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:30 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image153
Skittish About Mistakes
In carrying out your duties as a manager, you'll make an occa-
sional mistake. You
'
ll exercise bad judgment. It happens to all of
us. How you view and handle these mistakes is important not
only to your own development, but also in how others perceive
you. Be completely honest with yourself and everyone you asso-
ciate with. Don
'
t try to cover up a mistake, rationalize it, or - 
worse
 - 
imply that it might be someone else's fault. Many
managers have trouble getting the following two statements out
of their mouths:''I made a mistake''and''I'm sorry.''It'sas
though the words are stuck in their throats and can
'
t be ex-
pelled. These statements are not signs of weakness. They are
signs of con
fi
dence in your humanity.
New managers have dif
fi
culty accepting responsibility for
the mistakes of people who report to them. So skittish are these
managers about mistakes that they avoid criticism by handling
the more complex work themselves. When they do this, they
shut off their promotion possibilities, and kill themselves with
overwork, which is a grim prospect.
The way to solve this problem is to build your entire mana-
gerial role. You become and select better trainers; you become a
better selector of people; you develop better internal controls
that minimize the mistakes and their impact. And when mis-
takes happen and you
'
re the culprit, you admit it, correct it,
learn from it, and
 - 
above all - don't agonize over it. Then you
and the staff move on.
Self-Infatuation and Self-Contradiction
You have to put forth your best image, but don
'
t be so successful
at it that, like the movie star, you fall for your own publicity. Be
willing to admit to yourself what your shortcomings are. You'd
be surprised at how many managers can
'
t do that. They, of
course, have shortcomings. They can't be experts at everything.
But in ascending to their exalted position, theyfind that every-
one starts catering to them. It takes an unusual manager to real-
ize that all that honorific treatment doesn't increase intelligence
PAGE 153.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:30 PS
154Improving and Developing Yourself
or boost knowledge. It
Õ
s easy and pleasant to sit back and accept
all that bowing and scraping. The manager is soon convinced
that the adoration is deserved. Perhaps the charisma you think
is personal is merely created by the position you hold.
Theinfallibility syndromebecomes most noticeable at the
level of chief executive ofÞcer. Between the beginning manager
and the top post are varying degrees of infallibility that seem to
go with the job. You have to keep an honest perspective on who
you are. If tomorrow you were named CEO, you wouldn
Õ
t auto-
matically become smarter than you were yesterday. But people
would start listening to you as though you were one of the Three
Wise Men. You didn
Õ
t get smarter; you just gained more power.
Don
Õ
t confuse the two!
Pay little attention to what executives say in this regard. Pay
more attention to what they do. If an executive says,ÔÔI hire peo-
ple who are smarter than I am,ÕÕthink about what he does. Do
all the people he hires seem to be clones of him? If an executive
says,ÔÔI encourage my people to disagree with me. I donÕt want
to be surrounded by yes men,ÕÕremember what happened last
week when the executive snapped off the head of a subordinate
who did express a different point of view. If an executive says,
ÔÔMy door is always open,ÕÕand then looks visibly upset when
you walk in saying,ÔÔDo you have a moment?ÕÕthe words ring
hollow, indeed. The words are contradicted by actions and atti-
tude.
Throughout your business life, you
Õ
ll encounter executives
who espouse beautiful management philosophies. The main
problem is that they wield their authority using other, less desir-
able concepts. So be honest with yourself, recognize who you
are and try to get your performance to re
ß
ect your philosophy.
Shortcomings and Prejudicial Mind-Sets
Do not advertise your weaknesses. That
Õ
s foolish, but be willing
to admit them to yourself and do all you can to correct them.
For example, the things that you probably donÕt do well are also
the things that you don
Õ
t enjoy. That
Õ
s hardly a coincidence. But
you
Õ
ll get through those chores you don
Õ
t like if you exercise
PAGE 154.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:31 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image155
some self-discipline and get them out of the way. Remember
that, in your performance appraisal, the quality of your work
will not excuse errors in the tasks you donÕt like. So, even the
tasks you don
Õ
t care for demand quality performance. Every job
has aspects to it that youÕre not going to like; get them done
well, so they are out of the way and you can get to the parts that
are fun.
Be willing to admit mind-sets or attitudes of yours that may
be a problem. You canÕt take the edge off them if you canÕt admit
them. For example, think of the manager who has a prejudice
against other managers who leave the of
Þ
ce atÞve. He believes
that when people become managers, their work comesÞrst and
social and family obligations have to wait. He also believes that
any manager who leaves so early could not possibly have gotten
all their work done or done it well. That
Õ
s his prejudice; it
Õ
s his
mind-set. It
Õ
s not provable; it
Õ
s an emotional feeling he has. In
dealing with managers who have a life outside of work, this type
of manager must be aware of his mind-set and make every effort
to overcome it
Ñ
but without overcompensating for it. ItÕsa
tough situation, but we mustÞrst be willing to admit a fault
before we can deal with it.
Your Objectivity
Through the years we have all come across a great number of
managers who tell you theyÕre looking at a problem objectively,
and then proceed to explain their attitudes or solutions in a most
subjective way. When a manager starts off by claiming to be
completely objective, you must wonder why the statement is
being made. Does he or she protest too much? This preamble is
a giveaway.
It
Õ
s unlikely that you will ever be able to be completely ob-
jective. We are the sum of all our experiences. We like some of
our staff better than others, and you may not even be able to
explain why. It could be personal chemistry. As long as you rec-
ognize that, you can compensate by dealing fairly with those
who are less liked.
It seems better for the manager to not even bring up the
PAGE 155.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:31 PS
156Improving and Developing Yourself
subject of objectivity or subjectivity. How about being as honest
as you can be in your dealings with people, and not get into all
the shadings of objectivity and subjectivity? The recognition of
how dif
Þ
cult it is to be completely objective is a great place to
begin.
When your manager asks you,ÔÔAre you being objective?ÕÕ
your answer ought to be,ÔÔI try to be.ÕÕNo one can guarantee
that he or she is completely objective, but the effort in that direc-
tion is laudatory.
Quiet Confidence
Develop quiet con
Þ
dence in your decision-making ability. As
you make more and more decisions, you will get better at it.
Most management decisions do not require Solomon-like wis-
dom; they require the ability to develop the facts and know
when you have enough information to make the decision.
Don
Õ
t make emotional decisions and rationalize them after-
ward. When you do, you willÞnd yourself defending a decision
that you wish you hadnÕt made. A bad decision is not worth
defending, even if youÕre the person who made it. Once you
rationalize a bad decision, youÕre trapped.
Too many new managers believe that they have to be fast
decision makers in order to be successful. This creates an image
of shooting from the hip, which is not a desirable image to fos-
ter. The other extreme is not getting your gun out of the holster.
Balance and moderation are the keys. You donÕt want your staff
saying,ÔÔShe makes decisions too quickly,ÕÕnor do you want
them to say,ÔÔShe has trouble making decisions.ÕÕIf your em-
ployees and your own manager were to rank your decision-
making style, what you
Õ
re after isÔÔjust right.ÕÕ
Decision-Making Modes
It is also important for your conÞdence to be able to use a variety
of decision-making modes. Sometimes you will have to make
the decision yourself. You do this when you are the expert or
time is short. Other times, you will need to get the input from
PAGE 156.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:32 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image157
your staff and have them help you make the decision. And there
could be other times when you would allow the team to make
the decision for you. You would use this decision-making mode
when the team is more knowledgeable than you are. Don
Õ
tbe
the type of manager who uses only one method of making deci-
sions. Beßexible in your approach. When you are able to select
the correct decision mode for the situation, your conÞdence and
self-image will soar.
Promotion and Self-Promotion
As we already mentioned, youÕre judged by the performance of
your area of responsibility. The people who report to you are as
important to your future as are the people to whom you report.
That leads directly to the matter of of
Þ
ce politics. It exists every-
where. People recoil at the idea of of
Þ
ce politics, and that is be-
cause all people do not hold politics and politicians in high
regard. One of the meanings ofpolitics,which certainly has a
positive spin, isÔÔthe total complex of relations between people
in society.
ÕÕThe game of ofÞce politics exists, and nearly every-
one plays it. YouÕre either a player or a spectator. Most managers
are players.
OfÞce Politics: Playing the Game
Some people are viewed asÔÔcold turkeysÕÕby those who report
to them but asÔÔwarm, generous human beingsÕÕby their superi-
ors. These people are really playing the game, but in the long
run they
Õ
re sure to fail. However much they may succeed in ful-
Þ
lling their ambitions at the of
Þ
ce, they
Õ
ll fail as human beings.
If getting promoted is more important to you than your in-
tegrity, than being your own person, then you better skip the
rest of this chapter because you won
Õ
t like much of what is said
in it.
Almost anyone can succeed temporarily by being an oppor-
tunist, but consider the price that is been paid in getting there.
PAGE 157.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:32 PS
158Improving and Developing Yourself
Granted, many of the decisions made about promotions will not
seem fair to you, and they wonÕt all be made on the basis of
ability. No one guaranteed you that life would be fair, so don
Õ
t
expect it.
Often, individuals feel that most promotions are made on
the basis of something other than fairness and ability. But even
though most companies try to make these decisions fairly, it
doesn
Õ
t always come off that way. Besides, a decision that seems
perfectly rational to the executive who is making it may not
seem rational to you, especially if you thought you were the
likely candidate for the promotion.
In spite of that, you still have to prepare yourself for it to
get promoted. If you depend on luck or serendipity, your
chances are greatly diminished. You have everything to gain and
nothing to lose by being prepared. Who knows, your opportu-
nity for promotion may come from outside your company. You
want to be prepared for that possibility, too.
Preparing Your Understudy
As soon as you
Õ
ve mastered your job, you must start looking for
an understudy. The reason for this is clear. If the company re-
fuses to consider candidates to replace you, it may view you as
indispensable in your current position and you may be passed
up for promotion.
Finding the appropriate understudy can be a delicate mat-
ter. You should not select your crown prince or princess too
early. If the candidate doesn
Õ
t develop properly and fails to
demonstrate the skills needed to move into your job, you could
have a serious problem. Changing your mind about a successor
you
Õ
ve already selected is like opening a can of worms.
How you go about preparing for your own replacement is
of critical importance. If you already have an assistant who is
perfectly capable in the job, it
Õ
s merely a matter of helping that
assistant to develop as thoroughly and as rapidly as possible.
Give your assistant bits and pieces of your job to perform.
Under no circumstance should you delegate your entire job to
your assistant and then sit back and read newspapers and busi-
PAGE 158.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:32 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image159
ness magazines. The company obviously didn
Õ
t put you in the
position for that purpose.
Allow your assistant to do more and more aspects of your
job until most of it has been learned. Make sure the assistant
does each section of the job frequently enough that it won
Õ
tbe
forgotten. Occasionally, invite the assistant to participate in the
interviewing process when you
Õ
re hiring new employees.
Assuming the assistant is performing satisfactorily, start
your political campaign for your prospective replacement. Make
sure your boss knows how well the person is developing. On
performance appraisals, use terms and phrases such asÔÔpro-
motable
ÕÕandÔÔis developing into an outstanding management
prospect.
ÕÕOf course, never say these things if theyÕre untrue;
that would probably work to the disadvantage of both you and
your assistant. But if the assistant is developing well, communi-
cate it up to the next level without being blatant about it.
You run the risk that the assistant might get promoted out
from under you. It
Õ
s still a risk worth taking. Even if this hap-
pens to you several times, youÕll get the reputation of being an
outstanding developer of people. That will add to your own pro-
motability. Besides, youÕllÞnd that developing employees can
be a highly satisfying experience. And while youÕre worrying
about preparing your people for promotion, it
Õ
s hoped that your
own boss is just as concerned about you and your future.
Using Multiple Choices
If you don
Õ
t have an assistant already in place, you should assign
parts of your job to several people and see how they run with the
added responsibility and the new opportunity. This is indeed to
your advantage, since training several replacements at once
makes it unlikely that all the candidates will be promoted out
from under you. This in-depth backstopping will serve you well
in emergencies.
Don
Õ
t be in too big a hurry to move a single candidate into
the position of assistant. The moment you name a person as
your assistant, others stop striving for the job. That is the trouble
with any promotion. Those who don
Õ
t get it stop aspiring to it,
PAGE 159.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:33 PS
160Improving and Developing Yourself
which usually has an adverse effect on their performance, even
though it may be temporary.
The following management concept may be of value to you:
Always hold something out for your team members to aspire to.
If you get to the point where you have to select a single team
member as your heir apparent, then let the other candidates
know that opportunities still exist for them in other depart-
ments, and that youÕll help them toward their goal of a promo-
tion.
But as long as you continue to have several prospects vying
for the position, you must treat them as equals. Rotate the as-
signments among them. Make sure that all of them are exposed
to all aspects of your job. If you
Õ
re gone from the ofÞce occasion-
ally, put each in charge of the operation in turn. Give them all a
chance at managing the personnel aspects of the job, too.
On some regular basis, meet with all the candidates at once
and discuss your job with them. DonÕtsay,ÔÔLetÕs discuss my
job.
ÕÕRather, talk about some speciÞc problems theyÕve encoun-
tered. All of them will beneÞt from the discussion. If one of them
had to face an unusual management problem in your absence,
why shouldn
Õ
t all of them proÞt from the experience?
Avoiding the Perils of Indispensability
Once again, it is important to not allow yourself to become indis-
pensable. Some managers trap themselves into this kind of situa-
tion. In their effort to ensure the quality of the work, they request
that all dif
Þ
cult questions be referred to them. It doesn
Õ
t take
long for employees toÞgure out that anything out of the ordi-
nary will soon be going to you as the boss. It isn
Õ
t the time taken
from your day that creates problems. The more fundamental
trouble is that your people soon stop trying to work out the more
complex problems by themselves.
It
Õ
s important that your people be encouraged toÞnd an-
swers on their own. TheyÕll be better employees for it. There are
limits, of course, to the areas of responsibility that can be dele-
gated to them, but youÕre better off erring on the side of too
much latitude in delegating responsibility than too little. ItÕs
PAGE 160.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:33 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image161
good management to allow staff members some responsibility
while still assuring them that the executive is accountable for
their performance.
YouÕve heard people worrying about whether the company
would get along without them while theyÕre on vacation. They
have it backward: Their real worry is that the companywillget
along justÞne without them. The manager who is doing the
right kind of job in developing employees and backup manage-
ment can leave with the assurance that the department will func-
tion smoothly in his or her absence. The truly efÞcient and
dedicated executive, indeed, has progressed to the point where
he or she can even be gone permanentlyÑto a promotion in an-
other company. There are managers who, in a misguided view
of what their job required, made themselves indispensable and
spent the rest of their business careers proving it
Ñ
by never
being moved from that position.
The main problem with such people is that they donÕt un-
derstand what the job of management is about. Management
isn
Õ
t doing
Ñ
it
Õ
s seeing that it gets done.
Following Your Predecessor
It helps a great deal if your predecessor in the job was a real
dunderhead, who left the place in a shambles. Unless you
Õ
re a
complete loser, you
Õ
ll look like a champion by comparison. That
is preferable to stepping into a smooth-running operation. Fol-
lowing a company hero who is retiring or left to take a much
higher level position at another organization is difÞcult because,
no matter how well you perform, itÕs tough to be compared with
a hero and the legend that time bestows upon him.
So if you ever have a choice between moving into an area of
chaos or assuming a nice, clean operation, go with the disaster.
It could be a great opportunity to establish a reputation that will
stay with you your entire career. YouÕll not regret it.
Continuing Your Education
In preparing yourself for promotion, consider extending your
knowledge of the business you
Õ
re in. It
Õ
s not enough to become
PAGE 161.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:33 PS
162Improving and Developing Yourself
expert in your restricted area of responsibility. You must under-
stand more about your company
Õ
s entire operation.
You can acquire this additional knowledge in several ways.
For instance, you can broaden your knowledge through selected
readings. Your own boss may be able to recommend published
material thatÞts closely into your own companyÕs operation and
philosophy. No boss is ever insulted when asked for advice.
However, a word of caution: Don
Õ
t ask for advice too often, be-
cause your boss will either suspect you canÕt make up your own
mind about too many things orÞgure youÕre seeking a favor.
Neither of these reactions will help your cause.
If your company offers education programs, sign up for
them. Even if you canÕt see any immediate beneÞt from them,
they
Õ
ll serve you well over the long haul. In addition, youÕre
displaying an eagerness to learn.
Dressing for Success
Styles come and go, so what is inappropriate for business today
may seem satisfactory in a couple of years, or even months,
down the road. As a manager, you should not try to be a trend-
setter by wearing far-out, extreme, avant-garde clothing. You
might not think it fair, but you will not advance your career if
some executive refers to you, in conversations, asÔÔthat kooky
dresser down on theÞrstßoor.ÕÕ
What is acceptable or extreme may vary by the kind of busi-
ness you are in or the area of the country. For instance, what
might work in a fashion magazineÕsofÞce would seem inappro-
priate in a tradition-bound life insurance company. What may
be acceptable in the southwestern part of the country may not
sit well in the East. Obviously, what you wear as a manager in a
factory is altogether different from what you wear in an of
Þ
ce.
The point is that if you are going to be successful, it helps if
you look successfulÑbut not extreme. You should make a quiet
statement, not a loud clatter.
The following story points out how dress can differ from
company to company. Several years ago, a young man had an
interview scheduled at one of the more creative departments
PAGE 162.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:34 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image163
within a motion picture studio in Hollywood. He called up his
contact there and asked her what the dress was. She replied,
ÔÔ
casual.
ÕÕSo, the young man arrived in slacks and a nice pressed
shirt. He walked into the room and everyone was dressed in
tank tops and shorts! The wordcasualobviously meant different
things to the interviewee and to his contact. Despite being on a
different wavelength, however, the young man still landed the
job.
This story proves more than that companies have different
ideas on style and dress. It shows that youÕll make fewer fashion
mistakes as a businessperson by being a bit overdressed than by
being underdressed. If you go to an event wearing a suit and tie,
and youÞnd itÕs casual when you arrive, you can always take
off the jacket and tie. If you go casually andÞnd that everyone
is in a suit and tie, you cannot easily add the apparel to get in
compliance.
A rule of thumb is this: If youÕre not sure what to wear,
you
Õ
re better off erring on the side of overdressing.
Tooting Your Own Horn, but Softly
You can be the greatest thing since sliced bread, but if you
Õ
re the
only one who knows it, you wonÕt go anywhere with your many
talents. You need to get the word to the people you report to, in
the most effective way possible.
If you
Õ
re obviously tooting your own horn, people are going
to react negatively. You may come off as a blowhardÑa reputa-
tion you do not need. There are people with a great deal of abil-
ity who are too blatant in their self-promotion. It turns people
off and has the opposite effect of the intended result.
You must be subtle. You want the reaction of effectively
communicating.
The following example shows how a situation might be
handled so as not to be offensive to others and not generate a
negative reaction: Let
Õ
s say the local community college is offer-
ing courses that you think might help you do your job better,
and thereby make you more promotable. Here are some ways to
make sure your boss and the company are aware of your educa-
PAGE 163.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:34 PS
164Improving and Developing Yourself
tional efforts. (Anything that gets the job done without overkill
is after the goal.)
Send a note to the human resources department, with a
copy to your boss, asking that your personnel records
show that you
'
re taking the course. That puts the informa-
tion in yourfile, where anyone examining your record
and looking at candidates for promotion will see it. Upon
completing the course, again notify HR, this time of the
successful conclusion.
Engage in casual conversation with your boss (if he or she
hasn
'
t acknowledged the copy of the note to HR), and
mention something along the lines of''one of the students
in my accounting class said something funny last
night. . . .
''The boss may ask,''What accounting class?''
Place the textbooks on your desk. Eventually the desired
question may be asked.
Ask your boss for clarification of a class discussion item
that you did not fully understand.
If you have a classmate to the office for lunch, introduce
her to your boss.''Mr. Jones, I'd like you to meet my ac-
counting classmate, Nelda Smith.
''
You get the idea. The subtler you are, the less likely it is that
your efforts will come off as braggadocio. Your boss, who knows
something about self-promotion, recognizes that you are com-
municating about your accomplishments. If you do it well, he or
she may even admire your style.
With an apology to the Bible,''What profit it a man if he
becometh the most quali
fi
ed new manager in the company if no
one knoweth it?
''Too few bosses will approach you and say,
''Tell me - what are you doing to prepare yourself for promo-
tion?
''So you have to help them.
Some executives espouse the philosophy that if you do a
great job, the promotions and raises will take care of themselves.
This is a risky strategy, and you can't afford to take such
chances. If your superiors don
'
t know what you
'
re doing, how
can your accomplishments be taken into consideration? Develop
PAGE 164.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
Developing a Positive Self-Image165
a style of communicating the important aspects of your develop-
ment, but do it with a degree of understatement so that others
are not offended or construe you as too pushy.
But Is the Game Worth the Candle?
Being an outstanding manager and concurrently working up to
the next rung on the ladder is a constant in almost every manag-
er
'
s career
 - 
unless you lose interest in moving higher. There is
nothing wrong with not wanting to pay the price of moving to
the next level. That is healthy if it
'
s what you feel, because it
means you
'
re in touch with yourself. We all may reach a point
where we are no longer considered promotable. Also, we may
still be considered promotable, but we are comfortable where
we are and don
'
t want the aggravation that goes with the next
promotion. Besides, the promotion pyramid gets much nar-
rower the closer it gets to the top. Even the chairperson and CEO
are no longer promotable - at least in the present company.
In earlier editions of this book, it was mentioned that you
have a right to know where you stand, as far as promotability is
concerned. It was even suggested that there was nothing wrong
withpressingfor that information. Let's rethink this. If you don't
care to be promoted, why ask? If you
'
re offered a promotion,
that
'
sflattering and you might even change your mind.
If you want to be promoted, and you think a promotion is
long overdue, why ask and have some boss say,''No, I don't
believe you are promotable,
''or have your boss dodge the ques-
tion and leave you unsatisfied? If you ask, and your boss puts a
note in yourfile like,''Manager Jones pressed me about promo-
tion. Told him,'He's topped out.'''Now, let's say your boss
leaves and goes to another company, and you're getting along
famously with the new executive. You'd rather not have that
''
he
'
s topped out
''comment in yourfile. Why trigger that possi-
ble response
 - 
which may be faulty
 - 
and have it carved in stone?
If you are desirous of additional promotions, it helps to
keep your eye on the ball and not be distracted by some future
possibility. The greatest favor you can do to your career is to be
PAGE 165.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
166Improving and Developing Yourself
outstanding at the job you hold right now. Mastering your cur-
rent job is yourÞrst priority. Every other ambition must be sec-
ondary to that objective.
Acquiring a Sponsor
It helps to have a boss who sings your praises at the executive
level. Develop good relationships with all the executives with
whom you come in contact, who know the quality of your per-
formance, and who recognize your healthy upbeat attitude. If
the only one who thinks highly of you is your boss, and he or
she leaves the company for some super job in another organiza-
tion, you
Õ
ve lost your advocateÑunless your boss offers you a
great job in his or her new company. It helps if many executives
in the organization know your name in positive terms. Being
sponsored by several star executives is a great thing. Gladly ac-
cept any committee assignment that puts you in contact with
managers and executives beyond your own department.
Having Style and Merit
Achieving the objectives discussed in this chapter requires excel-
lent performance on your part and conÞdence in yourself. Often,
the difference between a satisfactory job and a great job is image
or style. Your style colors a superiorÕs perception of your per-
formance, especially if the style is one to which your superior
reacts positively. But a bad or offensive style is similarly critical
in evoking a negative response.
Doing a great job and maximizing the mileage you get out
of that is one thing; conning people into thinking you
Õ
re doing
an outstanding job when youÕre not cutting the mustard is quite
another and will create problems. The message and the perform-
ance must be synchronized.
PAGE 166.................11066$CH26 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
27
Managing Your Own Time
Have you ever come home from the ofÞcewith the feeling that
you didnÕt accomplish any of the things you wanted to get done
that day? We all have days like that, spent entirely in putting out
brushÞres. Sometimes it canÕt be helped, but if itÕs happening to
you regularly, part of the problem may be your own lack of time
management.
Smaller Segments
The following approach to time management has worked won-
ders for a successful nonÞction author. LetÕs hear it in his own
words:
''When Irst started writing seriously about ten years ago,
I'd set a goal of writing a full chapter every week, yet the
entire week would go by without my having written a sin-
gle line. The reason was my perception of needing to block
out many hours for a chapter. Nothing was happening.
Then I decided to break my goal down into smaller seg-
ments. The goal became to write two pages each day. Oc-
casionally, I'd miss a day; then I'd set a goal of four pages
for the next day. If for some unforeseen reason I missed
PAGE 167
167
.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:33 PS
168Improving and Developing Yourself
more than two days, I did not make the goal a cumulative
one, or I
'
d be right back to the block I had with the entire
chapter.
''As a result of setting more reasonable goals, I
started getting material written, even though other de-
mands on my time remained unchanged. The only change
was my attitude toward, and approach to, the problem.
Sometimes I would sit down to write my two pages and
ended up writing much more, ten orfteen. If I had estab-
lished a goal for that day offteen pages, I would not have
begun to write, owing to the lateness of the hour.''
The List
YouÕve probably heard of the late U.S. industrialist Henry Kaiser.
Among his many achievements was establishing a company that
built cargo vessels called Liberty ships during World War II.
These ships were fully constructed in a matter of days, truly a
spectacular accomplishment.
TheÞrst thing Kaiser did on entering the ofÞce in the morn-
ing was to sit at his desk with a legal-size pad on which he listed
the items he wished to accomplish that day and put the items on
the list in priority order. During the day, the list remained on
top of the desk. As a goal was accomplished, a line was drawn
through it on the pad. Goals that didn
Õ
t get accomplished that
day would be put on the next dayÕs list. Kaiser always tried to
work on his priority itemsÞrst.
Try this simple approach to organizing your day and you
will be pleasantly surprised at how much more you are able to
accomplish. You
Õ
re forced to plan the day
Õ
s activities as you
write the day
Õ
s objectives on the pad. ThatÕs probably the great-
est value of the technique.
There is one modiÞcation you might make in this system,
however, that may make it even more useful. You know your
own body better than anyone else. If youÕre at the peak of your
energy levels early in the day (a morning person), you should
do the tasks that require high energy theÞrst thing each day. On
PAGE 168.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:33 PS
Managing Your Own Time169
the other hand, if you don't hit your stride until later in the
day (an evening person), try to match the tasks to your different
energy levels. It also helps to do the things you don't care for
when you are at your higher energy times. But still focus on
getting the high priority items donefirst. The less important
ones can wait.
Some managers divide their lists into three categories: A, B,
and C. The A items are the crucial ones that must get donefirst.
If you have several A items, you need to decide which one is the
most important and do that onefirst. The B items can wait until
you have the time. The C items are not important. If you never
get to do them, it probably would not matter much. Then there
are those managers who like to do their C itemsfirst because
they get a sense of accomplishment. Do not fall into that trap.
When you do this, you really are not accomplishing anything. If
an A item is too big or foreboding, break it down into a few
parts, just as the author in the example did with his writing.
Many people get a psychological lift in drawing a line
through the tasks that have been completed. Some of them use a
big marking pen. It
'
s great to sit there at the end of the day's
activities and see those big marks crossing off so many tasks. It
'
s
a feeling of deserved accomplishment.
And don
'
t throw the list away when you leave the office.
The next morning, yesterday
'
s list will serve two purposes. It
will remind you of all you accomplished the day before - there's
nothing wrong with that - and will inform you of what re-
mained unaccomplished. These latter items then go on the new
list. That
'
s especially important for long-range projects that
might get accidentally dropped from the list. Too many creative
ideas and projects get away from us because we didn
'
t write
them down.
Have you ever gone to bed with an office problem on your
mind, only to wake up in the middle of the night with a solu-
tion? Then you awaken in the morning and it's gone. You can't
retrieve the idea from your memory. A paper and pen on your
nightstand for jotting such thoughts down during the night
solves these retrieval problems.
PAGE 169.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:34 PS
170Improving and Developing Yourself
The Closed Period
Some organizations follow a closed-of
fi
ce procedure you may
want to use in mapping out your own day to accomplish more.
For example, an office will have a two-hour closed period, where
it
'
s business as usual except that no one in the office goes to
see anyone else. No one makes interof
fi
ce phone calls and no
company meetings are ever scheduled during this closed period.
Genuine emergencies are handled expeditiously; calls from cli-
ents, customers, or other outsiders are accepted.
The idea has a great deal of merit. It means you'll have two
hours each day when no one from within the company is going
to call you on the phone or come into your office. It gives you an
opportunity to control what you do during the specified period.
Perhaps some person got the idea while working in the office on
a weekend and noticing how much more was accomplished than
in the same period of time during the week. But the idea is feasi-
ble only if you don't shut off your customers or clients during
the closed period. It's an idea an entire organization can use to
advantage.
The Need for Remembering and Reßecting
Here
'
s a bit of advice that won't do a whole lot for you at the
of
fi
ce but will help you remember things you're supposed to
stop for on the way home. Put a reminder in the pocket where
you keep your car keys. Then, on your way to the parking lot at
the end of the workday, you'll reach into your pocket for the car
keys and presto!
 - 
there it is.
Plan to have a quiet period each day. You may not get it
every day, but it
'
s important that you set aside some time for
daydreaming and reflection. It's vital to the inner person. Also,
problems that seem insurmountable often ease into proper per-
spective during these quiet times.
And try to put each day's activity into proper context.
Here
'
s an idea that, while it may be a bitflaky, gets the concept
across. A certain manager kept a one-day calendar next to the
PAGE 170.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:34 PS
Managing Your Own Time171
door of his of
Þ
ce. Beneath it sat a solitary, empty wastebasket.
As he left the of
Þ
ce at the end of the day, he would tear off the
sheet for the day just ending. He stood above the wastebasket
and tore thatÔÔdayÕÕinto as many small pieces as he could, then
watched the small pieces slowlyßutter down into the wastebas-
ket below. When asked what his thoughts were as he went
through this ritual, he said,ÔÔIt symbolizes to me that this day is
over. IÕve done the best I can with it. I now go on to the other
segments of my life, leaving this day behind, where it belongs.ÕÕ
Not a bad way of letting the completed workday slip into quiet
repose.
Other Time Management Tips
Here are some tips recommended by managers from a variety of
Þ
elds. You mayÞnd them helpful as well.
We all have the same amount of timeÑ168 hours per
week. No one has more time than you do. What you do
with this time makes the difference.
It is important to set speciÞc goals for each day or for each
week. Do not try to keep these goals in your head. Write
them down. Put them on your screensaver or have them
written on a bulletin board in your of
Þ
ce. Also, read these
goals during the day or week. It will be easier to sort out
the insigni
Þ
cant work that comes your way.
Set deadlines for your projects. This especially helps if
you are the procrastinator type. Avoid last-minute rush
jobs. Some people say they work better under stress and
tight deadlines. Perhaps they could work even better if
they were not under stress. They need to give it a try.
Remember the difference between something being ur-
gent versus important. We all have urgent things to do but
ask how important they are. It is best to focus on what is
important.
Try keeping a record for a week or two on how you spend
your time. Keep a time log and write everything down.
PAGE 171.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
172Improving and Developing Yourself
You may be very surprised where a lot of your time is
going. If we do not analyze our use of time, we will not
be able to manage it better. Or ask others for feedback
on how you use your time. They can often see what you
cannot.
Plan your day. The best time to do this is the afternoon or
evening before. This way you already know what you are
going to be focusing on at the beginning of the next day.
If you wait until the morning to do this planning, you may
get sidetracked.
The 70/30 rule: Only schedule about 70 percent of your
day. Leave the rest of your time for unplanned assign-
ments, the urgencies of others, or emergencies. If you plan
every minute of your day, you will be frustrated when
you do not accomplish all of it.
Schedule set times for sending and returning telephone
calls, reading and sending e-mails, ofÞce hours, and so
forth. This does two things for you. You save time by
doing similar items together and you have others eventu-
ally learn what your schedule is.
Make your daily schedule available to anyone who you
communicate with on a regular basis. This way they will
know where you are and what you are doing. There are
many software programs that allow you to do this elec-
tronically.
Realize that interruptions are part of the job and allow
time for handling them in your daily schedule. But try to
Þ
nd ways to reduce these unwanted interruptions. Here
are a few suggestions: Set up that quiet time so you wonÕt
be interrupted. Angle or position your desk so it does not
face the traf
Þ
cßow. When an unexpected visitor comes
into your of
Þ
ce, stand up and tell them you are working
on a key project for the big boss. Remove any chairs from
the front of your desk and if you really want someone to
stay pull out a chair from behind your desk and invite
them to sit down. Or put police tape in your doorway.
That quickly gives others the message that you are not to
be disturbed.
PAGE 172.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
Managing Your Own Time173
Don't wait for that perfect time for you to be in the right
mood to work on that high-priority item. That time or
mood may never come.
Reward yourself when you get one of those A priority
items completed. Take yourself out to lunch or leave a lit-
tle earlier that day.
Develop the on-time habit. Show up on time, hand in
things when they are due, and encourage your employees
to do the same. Be the model for time mastery in your
department.
PAGE 173.................11066$CH27 11-23-04 15:25:35 PS
28
The Written Word
ItÕs a source of amazement and some amusementthat many artic-
ulate people are reduced to blubbering incompetents when re-
quired to put their thoughts down in a written form.
Some people are intimidated by a blank piece of paper or
computer screen. LetÕs examine why this feeling of panic over-
takes individuals who otherwise appear to be competent and
conÞdent.
First, we have thetest syndrome.Some people panic when
taking examinations. All they have is that blank sheet of paper
and the material inside their head, which must be up to translat-
ing information to paper. Pass or fail depends on what is
scratched on that threatening blank sheet.
A second reason people may not feel conÞdent about using
the written word is that they do not read much themselves. They
get through what they consider required reading for work, but
they donÕt read for pleasure or for personal or professional de-
velopment. Instead, they watch too much television, which is
more passive than reading. You donÕt learn much about good
writing by watching television. You learn about good writing by
reading. Clearly, television is not to be blamed for all the social
ills attributed to it. However, few would quarrel that it has les-
sened the time many people spend reading, which in turn has
had an adverse effect on many peopleÕs writing skills.
PAGE 174
174
.................11066$CH28 11-23-04 15:25:36 PS
The Written Word175
Another reason people panic when they have to write is that
they spell poorly and donÕt want to appear foolish by demon-
strating it. So they avoid writing whenever they can, especially
if they will have to write ideas or talking points on big sheets of
paper or boards in front of others, or even jot down a written
note to someone. This avoidance behavior of having to spell
seems to be happening more and more. Fortunately, for poor
spellers, computers now have spell check. That has saved the
day for many of us, at least when we are using a word process-
ing program.
In addition, because people don
Õ
t write much today, except
when they are sending e-mails, they are intimidated when they
need to write a lengthy document or even send someone a hand-
written letter. An analogy to public speaking might make the
point. If you seldom give a speech in public, you are probably
intimidated by the situation. And when you are intimidated,
you are not relaxed. You are uptight and nervous. Your manner
of speaking is stiff and uncomfortable. You communicate your
apprehension to the audience; people may even feel uncomfort-
able for you. Your manner destroys their con
Þ
dence in you and
in the truth or wisdom of the message you are trying to deliver.
The same thing happens with written communication. If
you are intimidated by the situation, your writing will be stiff
and stilted. Under such circumstances, you may try to cover the
situation by writing in a more formal manner, using words you
would never use in conversation with a friend.
Books and courses will tell you how to write business letters
and interof
Þ
ce memos. They can be a big help, provided you
don
Õ
t take on the characteristics of the person who wrote the
course. Your goal is to improve your technical skills, not to
change your personality.
Mental Imagery Helps
One of the best methods for improving your writing skills is to
use mental imagery. Instead of being intimidated by the blank
piece of paper or screen, get a mental image of the person you
PAGE 175.................11066$CH28 11-23-04 15:25:36 PS
176Improving and Developing Yourself
are writing to. See that person in your mind. You might even go
so far as to imagine the person seated in an easy chair at the
of
Þ
ce drinking a cup of coffee and reading your note. Or you
could visualize yourself sitting in a coffee shop telling the per-
son the message you want to convey.
Imagine that you are having a conversation with the person
in a friendly environment. Now speak. Use words you
Õ
d use in
conversation. If you don
Õ
t use four-syllable words in your con-
versations, don
Õ
t use them in your written communication. Psy-
chologists tell us that people who only use certain words, these
fancy types of words, when they want to impress others in their
writing are actually showing signs of having an inferiority com-
plex. Even if you do feel uncomfortable with your writing, donÕt
advertise it
Ñ
keep it to yourself.
When conjuring up the mental picture of the person you
Õ
re
writing to, always imagine a friendly face. Even if you are, for
example, sending an e-mail to someone you canÕt stand, imagine
that you
Õ
re writing to a friend.Neverconjure up hostile feelings
because they may come through in your writing. Imagining a
friendly face will bring a friendly, warm tone to your communi-
cation.
Now let
Õ
s take a broader situation: sending an e-mail to all
the people in your department or division. You don
Õ
t want to
imagine forty-Þve people sitting in an auditorium waiting for
you to speak. That is too formal a situation, and unless youÕre
an outstanding and relaxed public speaker, the image is going
to make your writing formal and uptight.
Instead, get a mental picture of two or three of the friendli-
est employees you have reporting to you. Imagine that you are
on a coffee break or lunch break with them. Now say to them
what you have to say. That is what you write. If youÕre writing
to fellow managers in other departments, you can use similar
mental images.
Now, letÕs assume you have to write an update report to the
president of the company, and letÕs assume you are scared to
death of Ms. Big. Getting a mental image of the president is only
going to make the situation worse. Think instead of someone
who does not intimidate you. Imagine that person as the presi-
dent. Now write the report. The tone will be altogether different.
PAGE 176.................11066$CH28 11-23-04 15:25:37 PS
The Written Word177
Writing informally does not mean using incomplete sen-
tences or faulty grammar. Some e-mails sent by educated busi-
nesspeople would make their eighth-grade English teachers
hide in shame. Companies now offer in-house training courses
on how to write proper e-mails. You need to make certain your
grammar and spelling are correct.
If you are uncomfortable about your use of grammar or
spelling in written communications, learn the basics. They are
not that difÞcult and are certainly not cumbersome. An inexpen-
sive book on grammar and spelling or taking a course at a local
college or high school will help you in that regard. DonÕt rely on
an assistant or colleague to backstop you in this area. That is the
easy way out and may cause you to put off achieving compe-
tence in these important skills.
There is an additional reason you should be sure that your
grammar and spelling are correct in your writing. If it isn
Õ
t,
there
Õ
s a chance that itÕs also incorrect in your formal speaking
and even in informal conversations. If that is the case, it may
have an adverse impact on future success and promotion possi-
bilities.
So do your best to write and speak the language correctly
and to give it the dignity it deserves. Above all, rememberÑ
write to that friendly mental image.
PAGE 177.................11066$CH28 11-23-04 15:25:37 PS
29
The Grapevine
This chapter could be subtitledÔÔThe Most Effective Communica-
tion.ÕÕAny organization with more thanÞve people has a grape-
vine. Grapevines come about because people communicate with
each other, and people have a great need to know what is going
on. If they donÕt know, theyÕll speculate about what is going on.
You will never put an end to the grapevine, so you might as well
accept its existence and the fact that its tentacles reach into all
corners of the organization.
One way a manager can avoid a great deal of incorrect spec-
ulation is to do a good job of communication. If you do, theyÕll
have less opportunity to speculate incorrectly about important
matters. There will always be speculation and gossip. But by
being an effective communicator, you can reduce theincorrect
speculation. YouÕll never stop it completely, unless you have the
power to impose vows of silence while people are at work,
which isnÕt going to happen.
The grapevine even takes place after hours on the telephone
or via e-mail. An example of an e-mail in the evening might go
like this:ÔÔYou didnÕt get to hear the latest of whatÕs happening
now. I heard you were at the dentist. You wonÕt believe this
but. . . .ÕÕAnd so it goes on, ad inÞnitum.
As a new manager you can relate to this story. A fewÞrst-
time managers working in a commercial bank were wondering
PAGE 178
178
.................11066$CH29 11-23-04 15:25:43 PS
The Grapevine179
how quickly and efÞciently the grapevine could handle a rumor.
They knew that one of the principal participants was on theÞfth
ß
oor. They assigned one manager from the group to go to the
Þ
fthßoor and tell this person an outrageous rumor that could
be remotely possible. Then the manager walked back down the
stairs to theÞrstßoor where his work area was. He was not gone
ten minutes. When he got back to his desk, the secretary said,
ÔÔYouÕll never believe what I just heard.ÕÕShe repeated the rumor
the manager had delivered upstairs, with the addition of a few
creative modi
Þ
cations.
UsetheGrapevineSometimes
As a manager you can tap into the grapevine, for both sending
and receiving. If you develop good relationships with your peo-
ple, they
Õ
ll tell you what is going on. In fact, some of them will
vie for the opportunity to be theÞrst to bring you the latest
scoop.
You can send messages via the grapevine, too. If you donÕt
use it too often, it can be effective. The emphasis should be on
direct communication with your staff, and in doing so, you
avoid the embellishments that are invariably tacked on.
If you want to put something into the grapevine as a trial
balloon, for example, a perfect opening isÔÔKeep this under your
hat, but . . .ÕÕorÔÔThis is highly conÞdential, but. . . .ÕÕThat will
ensure its rapid movement through the system. Remember, the
only time an item is completely conÞdential is when you tell no
one.
PAGE 179.................11066$CH29 11-23-04 15:25:43 PS
30
Your Best Friend:
Delegation
It cannot be stressed enoughhow important it is for a manager
to know how to delegate and to actually delegate. When you
delegate properly, you can focus less on performing tasks and
more on managing and leading. Delegating is notdoling out. Del-
egation is taking something that you currently do and giving it
to one of your employees for the purpose of developing their
skills. Doling out is saying to an employee,ÔÔI am too busy, you
have to take some of the workload.ÕÕNever try to pass off a dol-
ing out as a delegation.
BeneÞts of Delegating
There are many beneÞts to delegating. You get employees who
are more involved and motivated because they are acquitting
new skills and developing themselves. Delegation is cost effec-
tive for the organization. The company now has someone in-
house who can do work that only you were able to do pre-
viously. And it frees you up to do other things like manage and
lead, take on additional projects from your management, and
get in more sets of tennis (just kidding).
PAGE 180
180
.................11066$CH30 11-23-04 15:25:44 PS
Your Best Friend: Delegation181
Why New Managers Don
ÕtDelegate
If delegation is so great, why don
'
t managers do it more often?
The number one reason is that they do not know how. It is a
skill that needs to be practiced. Then there are the insecure man-
agers. They are afraid that the employee will do it better than
they can or they think that their staff will say,''If he is delegating
to us, what does he do all day?''And of course, there are those
who just love the job so much that they do not want to give it
up. None of these are good reasons for not delegating. The only
time you should not delegate to others is if someone above you
tells you not to or if you have someone who is not ready or is
too busy to take on the delegation.
What Should Never Be Delegated
The things that should never ever be delegated even if you are
the CEO are all the personnel responsibilities. You always keep
performance appraisal, salary reviews, giving positive feedback,
coaching, discipline, termination, and so forth for yourself. In
addition, if something were of a sensitive or secretive nature like
a company downsizing, you would not delegate that task. Have
a delegator
'
s consciousness. Try to delegate 100 percent of what
you couldpossiblydelegate.
Whom to Delegate To
You can really delegate to all your employees. But you have to
handle it a little differently depending on whom gets delegated
to. And remember, once again, you do not want to overload
your best employees because you know they can do it. If you
keep overloading them, eventually, they will burn out and you
will lose your better performers. When delegating to your less-
experienced or less-skilled members, make sure you clearly ex-
plain what has to be done and monitor their progress much
more than you would one of your more experienced or skilled
employees. You can also delegate to the employee who has
failed on a previous delegation. When given another opportu-
PAGE 181.................11066$CH30 11-23-04 15:25:45 PS
182Improving and Developing Yourself
nity, this employee can regain lost con
Þ
dence. Try delegating to
your problem employees as well. A new challenge or project
may cause them to change their outlook on things.
The Delegation Steps
Following is a particular sequence you mayÞnd helpful when
you delegate. See if this process works for you.
1. Start off by analyzing which of your current tasks, pro-
jects, or jobs you could possibly delegate. Think about
what goes into getting the job done, how long it takes,
what resources are needed, and so forth.
2. Decide whom you could delegate it to. Consider who
would be most motivated by the opportunity, who has
the time, who either has the skill level or could acquire
the skills, and who has asked for additional responsibili-
ties.
3. Once you make up your mind, sit down with the em-
ployee and describe as many of the details as possible.
Also point out the bene
Þ
ts of taking on the delegation.
Obviously, if the person is new or inexperienced, you
must spend more time with him or her and provide more
details.
4. Finally, discuss how you are going to monitor the em-
ployee
Õ
s progress.
Avoid Upward Delegation
Resist taking on delegations from your direct reports. They will
come to you and say they are too busy or the work is too hard
or you can do it better than they can. If this happens to you, help
them with the project or get a subject matter expert to help them;
do not take it over. As manager, you want to be in the business
of developing others, not rescuing them.
PAGE 182.................11066$CH30 11-23-04 15:25:45 PS
Your Best Friend: Delegation183
In The Future
Delegation can be a great friend to you, your team, and the orga-
nization. Start thinking about what you could possibly delegate
today, tomorrow, or sometime in the future. Learn to delegate
and then do it; you won't be sorry.
PAGE 183.................11066$CH30 11-23-04 15:25:45 PS
31
ASenseofHumor
Many new managerstake themselves much too seriously. Life is
earnest, life is grim, and without a sense of humor, it is deadly.
New managers need to learn not to take themselves too seri-
ously and to develop a sense of humor.
One reason many of us take ourselves too seriously is be-
cause of the immediacy of the world in which we move. Our
daily activities are important to us because theyÕre the ones we
know most intimately. Therefore, everything that happens at the
ofÞce looms large in our lives. We should try to do our jobs to
the best of our ability, but once weÕre sure in our own minds that
we have done so, we shouldnÕt worry about it. The key phrase is
once weÕre sure in our own minds.Most of us are our own severest
critics.
Of course, the work we do is important. If it were not, no
one would part with cold cash in return for our efforts. But we
must keep what we do in perspective. It may be important in
our ofÞce, and it may be important to the people who deal with
our ofÞce, but it may not seem terribly signiÞcant when mea-
sured against the history of humankind. When youÕve had a bad
day and all seems lost, remember that a hundred years from
now no one will care, so why should you let it ruin your year,
month, weekÑor evening, for that matter? Our jobs are impor-
tant, but letÕs keep what we do in perspective.
PAGE 184
184
.................11066$CH31 11-23-04 15:25:48 PS
A Sense of Humor185
The English author Horace Walpole (1717Ð1797) said,ÔÔThe
world is a comedy to those that think, a tragedy to those that
feel.
ÕÕItÕs much easier not to take yourself too seriously if you
have a sense of humor. Nearly everyone has some sort of sense
of humor. But it is more keenly developed in some people than
in others. Even if you feel your sense of humor is weak, you can
improve it.
Developing a Sense of Humor
Here
Õ
s a newßash that provides some hope. Many people who
have a reputation for being funny, clever, and humorously cre-
ative donÕt really have any of these characteristics. What they
have is a terriÞc memory and a sense ofappropriateness recall.
They can reach back into their memories quickly andÞnd a hu-
morous line they
Õ
ve heard or read that is appropriate to the situ-
ation at hand. They get a reputation for having a sense of humor,
and they do have one, but they
Õ
re not necessarily creative. ItÕs
much like the difference between perfect pitch, which some feel
a person is born with, and relative pitch, which can be developed
and practiced.
So you can develop a sense of humor by reading, by seeing
the right kind of humorous movies, and by studying comedy.
Watch television personalities who have a reputation for being
funny. Watch people who areÔÔear funny.ÕÕA cream pie in the
face or a pratfall might beÔÔsight funny,ÕÕbut you canÕt use these
gags at the of
Þ
ce, and seldom in your social life.
Encouraging Laughter
In addition to developing a sense of humor yourself, as a manger
you also need to build a work environment that is fun and
where laughter is welcome. If the workplace is a fun and enjoy-
able place to be, your employees will show up more, work
harder, and be more productive. There are many different ways
to encourage laughter in your department. Here are a few ideas:
PAGE 185.................11066$CH31 11-23-04 15:25:48 PS
186Improving and Developing Yourself
Start off each meeting with a joke or have one of your
employees tell the joke.
Have a bulletin board devoted to laughter. People can
place cartoons or comic strips or jokes on it for their col-
leagues to look at and read.
A California manager turned one of the storerooms into a
laugh room. He put a VCR in the room and stocked it
with tapes of sitcoms and comedians. When he or one of
his staff members needed a laugh, they would go into the
room, put in a tape for a few minutes, and come out
laughing.
You might want to try these methods orÞnd some of your
own.
Humor
Ñ
Not Sarcasm
Achieving a reputation for having a dry sense of humor is ac-
ceptable; acquiring a reputation as the of
Þ
ce clown is not. Most
people can appreciate the difference. Being witty is one thing;
being a buffoon is quite another. But one warning: If you have
never said anything funny at the of
Þ
ce, break into humor on a
gradual basis; otherwise someone will want to check the water
supply.
Many people mistake sarcasm for wit; some sarcasm can be
funny, but there
Õ
s a twofold problem with being sarcastic. First,
you achieve a reputation for being a cynic, which is not a wel-
come trait in the executive suite. Second, sarcasm is often funny
at someone else
Õ
s expense. You don
Õ
t want people to think you
prey on the weaknesses or idiosyncrasies of others. Also you
don
Õ
t want to offend someone and make an enemy. ItÕs best if
your humorous remarks point inward or are neutral in nature.
Making fun of yourself or your own foibles makes you a self-
deprecating wit, which offends no one. Trading insults with an-
other person can be fun, but itÕs not a practice for beginners and
therefore should be avoided.
PAGE 186.................11066$CH31 11-23-04 15:25:48 PS
A Sense of Humor187
Humor, the Tension Reliever
A sense of humor is most valuable when things become hectic
and tense. A well-placed humorous remark can relieve the ten-
sion. It
'
s like opening a steam valve so that the pressure can
escape. It
'
s healthy to see humor in tense situations. Even when
it seems inappropriate to make your humorous remark aloud,
thinking about it may put a smile on your face and keep you
from getting a migraine.
We are surrounded by funny situations every day, but it
takes a trained eye to see them. As with the beauty all around
us, we don't look for them, and we may not even recognize them
when we do see them. With practice, however, you
'
ll begin to
see the humor in what goes on all around you.
Finally, there
'
s a compelling reason for not taking this life
and ourselves too seriously: None of us is going to get out of it
alive anyway.
PAGE 187.................11066$CH31 11-23-04 15:25:49 PS
32
Managing, Participating
in, and Leading Meetings
In Chapter 27,mention was made of companies that have closed
periods during which ofÞce personnel donÕt phone one another
and donÕt attend meetings. That gives them a certain amount of
uninterruptible time each day. Indeed, the productivity of the
entire country would be greatly increased if all ofÞce meetings
of more than two people, in business and government, were
banned for one year. Meetings are very expensive. You are taking
people away from their work. Always consider what alternatives
you have to holding a meeting. If the meeting is just for informa-
tional purposes, you can send out an e-mail with attachments,
but if you want discussion and decision making to occur, a meet-
ing is necessary. One-way communication does not require a
meeting unless the meeting participants never see each other.
Then, once in a while, it is nice to bring the group together.
The Cost of a Meeting
Can you justify your meeting in terms of its cost versus the bene-
Þts?
LetÕs say you have a meeting planned for your group of
PAGE 188
188
.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:51 PS
Managing, Participating in, and Leading Meetings189
Þ
fteen including yourself. You want to get their reactions to the
new procedures put into place last week and discuss a few other
items. You have scheduled two hours for the meeting. LetÕs cal-
culate the cost of this meeting. Assume the average salary of
everyone at the meeting is $60,000. Based on seven working
hours, that would make the daily salary about $231 and the per
person cost for two hours is $66. We multiply thatÞgure by 15
and get $990. Then add on any room rental fees, costs of snacks
and coffee, and so forth. Then some of your attendees may have
to travel to your meeting location. That takes them away from
their work for even a longer period. Ask yourself the same ques-
tion we started this section with:ÔÔCan you justify your meeting
in terms of its cost versus the beneÞts?ÕÕIf you can, go forward
with it. If you cannot,Þnd some alternative.
Advance Notice
An idea that helps generate a more productive meeting is to
send the proposed agenda to meeting participants a few days
before the meeting. Going to a meeting unprepared is counter-
productive. Many meetings are spur-of-the-moment necessities,
but a scheduled meeting should have an agenda.
If you are the only person knowledgeable about what is
going to be covered, that might feed your ego but it damages
the quality of the meeting. Your agenda should list every topic
to be discussed and the time frame for each topic. You must
always stick to the time frame so that you can end the meeting
on time. Nothing exasperates people more than having meetings
go beyond the agreed upon or announced ending time.
It is advisable to have different meeting participants take
the lead on different agenda items. This gets them more in-
volved and keeps the pressure off you. You can involve your
attendees in another manner. Ask them to contribute suggested
items for upcoming meetings. Realize that you are not aware of
everything going on around you.
Make sure you begin your meetings on time. You are wast-
ing valuable time and resources when you have people sitting
PAGE 189.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:51 PS
190Improving and Developing Yourself
around waiting for the meeting to begin. You never want any of
your meeting participants to feel that they are not as important
as the people you are waiting for. It also really burns your meet-
ing attendees when you are in the midst of the meeting and a
senior manager arrives, so you begin the meeting again for his
or her bene
Þ
t.
Another key thing to remember about agendas is to have
the most important items listed and discussedÞrst. You have
probably attended too many meetings where they took care of
the minor itemsÞrst, which took up most of the allotted meeting
time. Then there is never enough time to cover the really impor-
tant stuff.
Mistakes Managers Make
Many managers who are new to the meeting process feel obli-
gated to have an opinion on every issue. That isn
Õ
t necessary.
Have an opinion where your motivation is the issue, not the per-
ceived need to speak. ItÕs far better to make a few thoughtful
statements than to rattle on about everything. ItÕs preferable to
have an executive attending the meeting say,ÔÔJohn is a thought-
ful person,
ÕÕas opposed to,ÔÔYou ask John the time, and he
builds you a watch,ÕÕorÔÔHe does rattle on, doesnÕt he?ÕÕ
The other extreme of remaining silent during the entire
meeting is just as bad. It implies you are intimidated by the situ-
ation and that is not an image to create. Even if the situation
does intimidate you a bit, never let them see you sweat. Chapter
33, which covers public speaking, will help you in this regard.
Never say anything uncomplimentary in a meeting about
anyone on your staff. It will be received as disloyalty on your
part. Handle situations, not personalities. Managerial careers
have been halted by a manager who trashed an employee in
front of a high-ranking executive. This type of behavior says
more about you than about the employee.
Some managers view a meeting with higher-ranking execu-
tives as a place to display management skills and wares. That is
all right if you go about it correctly. However, if you view the
PAGE 190.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:52 PS
Managing, Participating in, and Leading Meetings191
meeting as a competition with other managers at your level,
your emphasis is wrong. Your goal should be to be a productive,
contributing member of the committee, not to show up other
managers. Competition is the wrong element to bring to the
table.
Another mistake that many managers make is seeing which
way the boss is going on an issue, so that their positions are the
same. The idea is that their bosses will think more of them if
they agree with them, or think as they do. Most bosses immedi-
ately spot that game, and the managers may be thought of as
spineless. Of course, if you have a point of view that is different
from your boss, state it in a diplomatic, reasoned wayÑbut you
ought to do that anyway. If everyone agrees with the boss, you
don
Õ
t need the committee.
By the way, many managers lack the courage to take a posi-
tion different from their bossÕs. Probably in the vast majority of
situations, the courage to state a thought-out position, even if
different from the boss
Õ
s, does more for a career than transpar-
ent agreement. There are even executives who deliberately
throw out a false position to see which sheep will follow, and
then agree with someone who had the courage to state the cor-
rect position. (Most executives didn
Õ
t get to their exalted posi-
tions by being stupid.)
Any executive chairing a project or a meeting with members
she outranks would do well to hold back disclosing her own
position untilaftereveryone else has given their thoughts and
opinions. Example: The president of a company headed up a
corporate reorganization project team consisting of seven peo-
ple. The president wisely didn
Õ
t announce her opinions until
after she
Õ
d called for everyone else
Õ
s. That approach precluded
anyone from playing up to the president, if he or she would have
been tempted to do so.
An executive does not need employees or projects team
members to play up to him or her. This approach might also
teach new managers that it is okay to have a different point of
view. Of course, as mentioned earlier in this book, some execu-
tives say they donÕt want yes people, but their actions indicate
otherwise. These executives end up with rubber-stamp teams
PAGE 191.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:52 PS
192Improving and Developing Yourself
and employees who merely provide cover for the executive, and
that is a terrible waste of corporate and managerial time.
Advantages of Being on Project Teams
There are several advantages to being placed on a project team:
First, someone believes you can make a contribution or
you wouldnÕt have been selected. So make the most of it.
Second, you may come in contact with managers and ex-
ecutives across a wide spectrum of the organization.
These are valuable contacts.
Third, you may have the opportunity to become involved
in decisions that reach beyond your own area of responsi-
bility. This broadens your experience with the organiza-
tion as a whole.
How to Lead a Meeting
When you become the meeting leader, you should take it as a
compliment: Someone sees leadership in you. Don
Õ
t shy away
from such an opportunity.
Some of the best training for leading a meeting is in being
exposed to some poorly chaired ones. Most meetings last too
long. You can
Õ
t help but wonder if some folks think sitting
around at a meeting beats working. But probably the main rea-
son meetings last too long is that they are poorly planned and
inef
Þ
ciently chaired.
In addition to the earlier suggestion about circulating an
agenda in advance, distribute the minutes of the previous meet-
ing. Most everyone then reads the minutes before going to the
meeting, and except for a minor correction now and then, ap-
proval of the minutes is quickly disposed of. Contrast that with
everyone sitting around forÞfteen minutes reading the minutes
and feeling compelled to nitpick them to death.
Obviously, all agendas show starting times of meetings. It
PAGE 192.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:52 PS
Managing, Participating in, and Leading Meetings193
adds discipline to a meeting if you also show the expected clos-
ing time. People tend to stay focused on the subjects at hand if
the meeting has an expected adjournment time.
Most meetings are run rather informally. YouÕll seldom
chair a committee that requires you to be an expert parliamen-
tarian. If it does get formal, youÕll have to familiarize yourself
withRobert's Rules of Order.Having this reference available is a
good thought, but youÕll rarely need it. In all the years youÕve
attended business meetings, you probably canÕt recall any par-
liamentarian questions having been raised, except in jest.
The rules of common sense should prevail in leading a
meeting. Keep your cool. DonÕt let anyone press your panic but-
ton. Be courteous to all meeting participants. Avoid putting peo-
ple down. Act as a facilitator, not as a dictator. Keep to the
subject. Don
Õ
t cut people off before they
Õ
ve had their say, but
don
Õ
t allow them to drift away from the subject. Always deal
with the problem at hand. A fair meeting leader discourages the
same points from being expressed repeatedly.
Don
Õ
t get involved in personalities, even if others do. Be
better organized than anyone else at the meeting. Develop the
kind of thoughtful relationships with participants that will
prompt them to come to you beforehand with unusual items,
thereby avoiding unpleasant surprises. Be fair to everyone, even
minority opinions that are unlikely to prevail. The majority view
should not steamroll the minority opinion, at least until that
opinion has had a fair hearing. If you are fair to all viewpoints,
you
Õ
ll earn the respect of all the participants. Being a successful
meeting leader is another chance to display the high quality of
your management skills.
Other Meeting Tips
Establish ground rules at the beginning of a meeting.
Ground rules are agreed upon behaviors that everyone
follows. They help the meeting run more smoothly and
they avoid a lot of disruptive behaviors. Meetings have
ground rules about staying on topic, allowing everyone to
PAGE 193.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:53 PS
194Improving and Developing Yourself
participate, criticizing the suggestion but not the messen-
ger, and so forth. Ground rules are very helpful and you
would be wise to develop a set with your meeting partici-
pants.
Spendfive or ten minutes at the end of a meeting to dis-
cuss with the group how the meeting went. You want to
get feedback so you can improve the quality of the next
meeting you run.
Have on the top of your agenda the purpose of the meet-
ing and what you anticipate achieving.
Only invite those individuals who should really be there.
As a rule of thumb, have the fewest people possible. Also,
individuals do not have to stay for the entire meeting.
They may only be interested in or need to be there for a
couple of the agenda items.
You want your meetings to be as short as possible. Keep
in mind that after about two hours most people's attention
span is shot. If your meetings run longer, you need
breaks. That can become time consuming and even more
costly.
Prepare a follow-up action plan with action items for the
different participants. Make sure everyone gets a copy so
each person knows what other people's responsibilities
are.
Finally, get rid of the chairs. If you want to reduce the
time of your meetings, make people stand. If you do this,
a thirty-minute meeting, for example, can be reduced in
half. You will need chairs if meetings run more than
twenty minutes or people are not physically able to stand.
You may also need something for them to lean on if they
need to take notes, or for their portables.
PAGE 194.................11066$CH32 11-23-04 15:25:53 PS
33
Taking Center Stage:
The Role of Public
Speaking in Your Career
It is amazingthat there are so many capable managers who canÕt
handle a public speaking situation. Standing up there on the
platform, they come off as the dullest clods imaginable. The im-
pression the audience receives is that theyÕre not very good on
the job, either. That impression may not be correct, but as weÕve
discussed earlier, people act based on their perceptions.
Prior Preparation
Many managers are rotten public speakers because they wait
until theyÞnd themselves in a speaking situation before they do
anything about it. By then, itÕs too late. You can be the greatest
manager in the world, but your light will be hidden under a
bushel basket if you donÕt prepare yourself to be a public
speaker.
Because so few people in managerial positions prepare
themselves to speak publicly, youÕll have a leg up on most of
them if you learn how itÕs done. Public speaking frightens many
PAGE 195
195
.................11066$CH33 11-23-04 15:25:55 PS
196Improving and Developing Yourself
people, and so they avoid it like the plague. Many people - not
just managers
 - 
have a fear of public speaking. In fact, public
speaking ranks near the top of phobias that people have.
As a new manager, you may have the option of not having
to do presentations or public speaking to outside groups but
you probably will not have that choice within your own organi-
zation. It may be a meeting of your department in which you
have to get up and explain a new company policy. It may be a
retirement dinner for someone in your area of responsibility,
and you
'
re expected to make a''few appropriate remarks.''You
may have to do a client presentation or one in front of the board
of directors. Your boss may be out ill and you may have to pitch
hit for him or her at the last minute. Managers will often go to
unbelievable lengths to avoid these types of speaking situations.
They will use ploys such as arranging a business trip so they
'
ll
be out of town, or scheduling their own vacation for that time.
They
'
ll spend the rest of their business lives plotting how not to
get up in front of a group and speak. How much better off they
'
d
be if they
'
d obtain the necessary skills and turn these negative
situations into resounding advantages.
What many people don
'
t realize is that learning to be an
excellent public speaker will also improve their ability to speak
extemporaneously. How do you respond when you're unexpect-
edly called on to say a few words? The most extreme example of
someone who has dif
fi
culty in front of an audience is the person
who couldn
'
t lead a group in silent prayer.
Presentation training won
'
t get rid of the butter
fl
ies in your
stomach, but it will organize them into effective squadrons.
Where to Receive Presentation Training
There are three speci
fi
c ways that can help you to learn how to
be an effective presenter. First, there is Toastmasters Interna-
tional, an organization dedicated to the concept of developing
skills in listening, thinking, and speaking. There are neither pro-
fessionals nor staff members in these clubs, only people who
have a mutual interest in developing their speaking capacity. For
PAGE 196.................11066$CH33 11-23-04 15:25:55 PS
Taking Center Stage: The Role of Public Speaking in Your Career 197
a modest semiannual fee, you receive the materials you
Õ
ll need
to begin the process. You go at your own speed, and you
Õ
llÞnd
a group of people who help one another not only by providing
an audience but also by engaging in formal evaluation sessions.
Another aspect of the ToastmastersÕtraining that is invalu-
able is what are called Table Topics. This part of the meeting is
designed to develop your skills in extemporaneous speaking.
The Topic Master calls on various people (usually those not
scheduled to give a formal speech that evening) to talk for two
or three minutes on a surprise subject. The time you have to
prepare extends from the moment you rise from your chair until
the moment you arrive at the lectern.
There are Toastmasters clubs all over the world, so itÕs likely
that you
Õ
llÞnd one in your area. If not, you can go online to
www.toastmasters.org.
The next way to build up your public speaking ability is to
take a training course or a college course in presentation skills.
There are many training organizations available that offer excel-
lent programs. One of them is the American Management Asso-
ciation (AMA). The organization has programs throughout the
world. Its Web site is www.amanet.org. Both Toastmasters and
AMA are nonpro
Þ
t organizations.
The third way to become an effective presenter is to get one-
on-one coaching. Here, you or your company hires an individ-
ual to give you private instruction and guidance. It is expensive
but really worth it. Your HR department can help you locate a
quali
Þ
ed individual.
By no means are these three suggestions your only alterna-
tives. You can read books, watch professionals in action,Þnd
someone in-house whose presentations you admire and ask
them to work with you, or rent videos or tapes on the topic.
Next Week'sPresentation
You might be saying to yourself that these are all great sugges-
tions for the future, but what do you do if you have to give a
presentation next week. Here are some basic things to remember
and do when presenting in front of a large group:
PAGE 197.................11066$CH33 11-23-04 15:25:55 PS
198Improving and Developing Yourself
Decide what the purpose of your presentation is and write it out
in one sentence.It should not be longer than one sentence and
should be clear to anyone listening to it or reading it. Also think
of your purpose in behavioral goals. That is, what do you want
the audience to get from your presentation? Do you want them
to remember certain things, know a particular procedure, or
physically be able to demonstrate the use of something?
Develop your subject matter outline.Most studies have
shown audiences only remember one main point and three sub-
points. Keep the presentation as brief and tight as possible.
During the planning for and delivery of the presentation, keep
these well-known words about presentations in mind:ÔÔTell them what
you are going to tell them (do this in the opening), tell them (do this
in the main body of your talk), then tell them what you told them (do
this in your conclusion).
ÕÕ
Before planning your talk try to do an audience analysis.Find
out who they are, their reasons for being there, their interest and
academic levels, their attitudes, their cultural backgrounds, ages,
and so forth. The more you know in advance about the audience
you better you will be able to prepare for your talk.
During the presentation watch your audience.Are they smil-
ing and attentive or restless, confused, engaging in chats with
their neighbors, or leaving? You may need to change your deliv-
ery style by talking louder or lower, faster or slower, cut things
short or explain in more depth, change your tone of voice, and
so forth.
If you are using visuals like PowerPoint slides, donÕt talk to the
slides, talk to the audience.Most new managers make this mistake.
Visuals should be a backup for the audience. You need to be the
main attraction.
Practice, practice, practice.If you are prepared and comfort-
able with what you are presenting, you will come across as
much more relaxed and you will experience much less stage
fright. However, do not make the mistake of memorizing your
presentation. This can be disastrous if you forget your place.
Be ready to adapt to all situations.You never know what
might happen at a presentation. The equipment may be faulty,
PAGE 198.................11066$CH33 11-23-04 15:25:56 PS
Taking Center Stage: The Role of Public Speaking in Your Career 199
rendering useless your wonderful slides or video clips. You have
to be ready to quickly reorganize your presentation. Or suppose
your plan includes having the audience break up into small
groups for discussion purposes during your presentation. But
the auditorium has those chairs that cannot be moved. You
'
ve
got to have an alternative plan or your presentation will fall
apart before you begin.
Be energetic, lively, and demonstrate to the audience that you
are enjoying your talk.If you don't, you really should not expect
them to be enthusiastic and interested.
Fringe BeneÞts
How many outstanding public speakers do you personally
know, either inside or outside your organization? Probably not
many, if any. Why don
'
t you resolve to be one of the few who
are outstanding? Think of the possibilities not only for promo-
tion within your company but also for positions of leadership
within the community. As a matter of fact, the opportunities
for leadership challenges may come more quickly outside the
company. Consider what that may open up for you. There are
many followers out there waiting for someone to lead them. One
characteristic most outstanding leaders have is the ability to
speak persuasively on public occasions. There is no reason why
you can
'
t be one of those few leaders.
PAGE 199.................11066$CH33 11-23-04 15:25:56 PS
This page intentionally left blank
PARTSIX
THECOMPLETEPERSON
PAGE 201.................11066$PRT6 11-23-04 15:23:40 PS
This page intentionally left blank
34
Coping with Stress
Many new managers believethey should be able to arrange their
work life so that there will be no stress. But stress cannot be
avoided. Occasionally, it will come calling. How you react to it
is the key. You cannot always control what happens; what you
can control is how you react to what happens to you.
What causes work-related stress?
There are innumerable causes for work-related stress. We
all have different thresholds to what is stressful for us. But any-
thing that takes our body or mind out of whack is stressful. Here
are some typical work-related stressors:
Receiving no direction from the boss
Computer failures
Constant interruptions
Priorities constantly changing
Upper management constantly changing
Mergers
Downsizing
Reorganizations
Organizational politics
Time pressures
PAGE 203
203
.................11066$CH34 11-23-04 15:25:58 PS
204The Complete Person
Performance pressures
Poor time management
Bringing personal problems to work
Working long hours for extended periods of time
No doubt you can relate to many of these stressors.
Some Relief
Here is an interesting factor about stress that may make you feel
better about the stress you feel early in your managerial career:
Most of what seems stressful when you're new in management
will seem ordinary and even mundane after you're experienced.
This possibility reinforces the point that it may be your reaction
and inexperience that causes you to consider it stress, rather
than the situation itself. That may be afine point, but the distinc-
tion seems significant.
Go back in your memory to the days you were taking driver
education to learn how to safely operate an automobile. Thefirst
time you got behind the wheel was quite stressful. With experi-
ence, your ability to drive improved to the point that driving
now seems as natural as brushing your teeth. The situation has
not changed, but your experience and reaction to it has changed.
How you react to apparent stressful situations is part of
your management style. Too many managers look so deep in
thought. The brow is furrowed all the time. This demeanor is
contagious to everyone working with you; unfortunately, it's
contagious in a most negative way. However, a manager who
can smile and be pleasant in what seems to be a stressful situa-
tion instills con
fi
dence in all who are working on the project.
It
'
s hard to think clearly when you are uptight and nervous,
so that reaction exacerbates the situation. That is a double
whammy. You have a stressful situation, and your reaction di-
minishes your ability to bring it to a successful resolution.
The third whammy is the knowledge that says,''I'm going
to be judged by how I handle this type of situation.''That ele-
ment adds even more pressure. Telling yourself not to get up-
PAGE 204.................11066$CH34 11-23-04 15:25:58 PS
Coping with Stress205
tight is like someone telling you not to worry. It's much easier
said than done.
There are those who believe that stressful situations get the
juicesflowing and bring out the best in people. You've heard the
old saw,''When the going gets tough, the tough get going.''That
is true once you get over the fear of a stressful situation. Fear
is like pouring the juices of stress down through a very small
funnel.
ReacttotheProblem,NottheStress
To succeed, you must convert the fear of a stressful situation into
the challenge of a stressful situation. If you are going to be a
manager who periodically faces stressful situations, here are
seven suggestions for you:
1. Don
'
t be panicked into impulsive action. It may make
matters worse.
2. Take several deep breaths and try to relax. Speak slowly,
even if you don
'
t feel like it. This instills calm in those
around you. It says,''He's not losing his head, and there-
fore I shouldn
'
t.
''
3. Reduce the situations to two or three key points that
could be handled to remove the urgency of the moment,
so that the rest of it can be processed in a nonurgent way.
4. Assign three or four major elements to members of the
staff to process in parts and then be combined into the
whole.
5. Ask for suggestions and ideas from the experienced
members of your staff.
6. Think about the problem and not your reaction to it.
7. View yourself as an actor playing the role of the wise,
calm, and decisive leader. Play that role to the hilt, and
after a while it will cease to be role-playing and will be
you. This constitutes changing your reaction to the
stressful situation.
PAGE 205.................11066$CH34 11-23-04 15:25:58 PS
206The Complete Person
Have ConÞdence in Your Abilities
As a manager, you handle tougher questions than those that
came to you before the promotion. If they were all easy, anyone
could solve them. You are there because someone saw in you the
ability to deal with these more dif
Þ
cult situations. As you move
up the corporate ladder, the problems become more complex,
or so it seems. The important thing to remember is that your
experience will remove most of the stress. When you
Õ
ve been a
manager for a while, you will not react the same way to the same
situation, as you did theÞrst few months in your managerial
career.It will get better.
In the early days in management, just having the job brings
elements of stress. That is why so many new managers look in-
tense, as though they are carrying the weight of the world. While
the concern and the desire to perform well are commendable,
the intensity gets in the way of getting the job done. You are
managing people in the tasks they need to complete in order to
achieve a desired result. You are not leading them out of the
trenches, with bayonets at the ready, across a mine
Þ
eld to en-
gage the enemy in hand-to-hand combat.
The best advice for you to follow as a new manager is
ÔÔ
Lighten up.
ÕÕ
PAGE 206.................11066$CH34 11-23-04 15:25:59 PS
35
Having Balance
in Your Life
TheÞrst-time manager becomesso engrossed in the new respon-
sibilities that the job occupies almost every waking moment.
This dedication is admirable, because it indicates that the person
is determined to do a great job and be successful as a member
of the management team.
But life must have balance. While your career is important,
it is not your entire life. Actually, you will be a more complete
manager if you are a more complete person. You cannot separate
the two.
When you ask people what they do, they will automatically
tell you what they do for a living. They are a dentist, accountant,
lawyer, salesperson, manager, barber, or trucker. But we are all
so much more than what we do to earn our daily breadÑor if
weÕre not, we should be.
There are many sad stories of people who retire and lose
their sense of identity and sense of worth. The job was their life,
and when they retire, they lose their identity. A person who
has this reaction to retirement is not a complete person. Their
interests, other than their families, all revolve around their ca-
reers. ItÕs understandable to miss your work, especially if you
enjoyed it, but no longer working should never be the end of all
meaningful life.
PAGE 207
207
.................11066$CH35 11-23-04 15:26:02 PS
208The Complete Person
A person whose only interest is the job is a one-dimensional
individual, and a one-dimensional person is not as effective a
manager as a multidimensional person.
I
Õ
m not referring to yourÞrst few months on the job. But
after you have successfully passed through the breaking-in pe-
riod, you need to broaden your interests and your activities.
Community Work
Everyone who aspires to management needs to be involved in
the community. You donÕt take from a community and not put
something of yourself back into it. The same is true of your pro-
fession. Put something back into your professional associations.
These are not completely altruistic recommendations. The pri-
mary objective is to be of assistance to the cause of the profes-
sion, but there are ancillary bene
Þ
ts. You become known within
your community and your profession. You enhance your base of
knowledge, and you make some nice contacts and friends. That
not only makes you a broader-based manager but also a more
promotable one. And the higher you go in the organization, the
more important leadership becomes. Community and profes-
sional association leadership are viewed most favorably in the
executive suite of an overwhelming number of companies.
There have been countless situations where two people
being considered for promotion were both quali
Þ
ed as far as the
work was concerned. It was a close call, and the difference came
down to leadership within andoutsidethe halls of the company.
In many companies today, staff is allowedÔÔrelease timeÕÕto en-
gage in company sanctioned community service programs.
Outside Reading
While it is vital that you read about your business, it is also
important that the manager be a well-read person. A manager
should be a well-informed citizen and should know what is
going on in his or her city, state, and nation. That means keeping
PAGE 208.................11066$CH35 11-23-04 15:26:03 PS
Having Balance in Your Life209
up-to-date by reading newspapers, news magazines, and the
trade magazines of your industry. A manager needs to be well
informed about the world. What is going on in the world does
affect your organization.
It also helps to read a good novel once in a while. Good
Þ
ction writers often have great insight into the human condition.
Besides, these books are entertaining, and that is positive too.
Some managers have their teams read the same book and then
the book is discussed at a meeting or get-together. The book can
be on leadership, communication, or a subject related to their
business. This practice makes for great discoveries about each of
the team members and helps build a high-performing team.
All people at all stages of their lives need to stay mentally
challenged and alert. It
Õ
s much easier to do that if you maintain
broad-based interests. Reading is just one way to do that.
Leave Work Behind
You must have the ability and determination to separate work
from the rest of the day. It is important to be able to leave work
at work and go on with the rest of your life. We need to have
interests, hobbies, and other things to do outside of work. That
really helps us give our life balance. A big mistake made by
many managers, especially new ones, is to take work home with
them. Most managers who do this never get to it. And it adds to
their stress levels, because they think about the work all night or
all weekend and see it every time they pass it sitting there on the
dining room table. Stop taking work home. Either stay a couple
extra hours at work that day or show up early the next day or
on Monday morning.
PAGE 209.................11066$CH35 11-23-04 15:26:03 PS
36
ATouchofClass
There are many meaningsto the wordclass.The meaning we will
concern ourselves with isÔÔstyle and elegance in oneÕs behavior.ÕÕ
Class in a manager or executive consists of what is done and,
often of greater importance, what isnot done.
Class is treating people with the dignity their humanity
deserves. It is not in treating them as objects of produc-
tion.
Class has nothing to do with your social status in life. It
has everything to do with your behavior.
Class does not use foul language, even when irritated.
Class means having the large vocabulary that makes four-
letter words unnecessary.
Class does not have to be the center of attention. It can
allow others to bask in glory without feeling slighted.
Class does not tell off-color or racially demeaning jokes.
Class separates any sexual desires from the workplace,
and would never make a remark to a person of the oppo-
site sex that wouldnÕt be said in front of oneÕs mother, if
she were standing alongside.
Class does not say anything derogatory about the organi-
PAGE 210
210
.................11066$CH36 11-23-04 15:26:05 PS
A Touch of Class211
zation, no matter how justi
Þ
ed you may feel it is, at a mo-
ment of disappointment.
Class does not allow the unsatisfactory actions or negative
words of others to drag one down into that ugly arena.
Class does not lose its cool. It never burns its bridges.
Class does not rationalize mistakes. It learns from them
and moves on.
Class in a manager emphasizesweand downplaysI.
Class is good manners.
Class means respect for oneself as a foundation for respect
for others.
Class never makes a demeaning remark about oneÕs
spouse. These remarks say more about the speaker than
the spouse.
Class in a manager means loyalty to oneÕs staff.
Class means not believing one is superior to oneÕs em-
ployees; each simply has different responsibilities.
Class does not take action when angry. It waits until cool
reason has returned. Class is not impetuous.
Class recognizes that the best way to build oneself is to
Þ
rst build others.
Class does not become overly concerned about receiving
credit. Class also recognizes that sometimes one receives
more credit than one deserves. It helps balance out those
times when there are no accolades.
Class works hard at making action consistent with words.
Class doesnÕt build oneself up by tearing others down.
Class leads by example.
Class knows the importance and value of a warm smile.
PAGE 211.................11066$CH36 11-23-04 15:26:06 PS
Conclusion
A variety of topicshave been covered in this book on how to lead
people, but certainly not every situation youÕll confront in your
career as a managerÑor even within theÞrst few weeks in your
new roleÑhas been reviewed.
There is no way that a book of this sort can be made all-
inclusive. It is the hope that you have gained some insight into
the techniques of managing people that will make the job more
meaningful, enjoyable, and understandable. You may think that
weÕve spent an inordinate amount of time on attitudes, on how
you view yourself and the problems you face, but that is exactly
where your success or failure in working with people will be
determinedÑin your head.
If youÕre the type of person who believes youÕre primarily
controlled by events, then whatÕs the use? YouÕre merely a pup-
pet then, with some giant puppet master pulling the strings. But
in actuality, itÕs not that way. Although events beyond your con-
trol do have an impact on your life, you control how and what
you think. That in turn controls your reaction to these events.
There has been no conning in this book. You havenÕt been
told you that if you work hard and keep your nose clean youÕll
rise to the top. However, youÕll have a better chance if you follow
some of these concepts than if you ignore what are basic truths.
PAGE 212
212
.................11066$CONL 11-23-04 15:23:46 PS
Conclusion213
You didnÕt come into this world with any guarantee that every-
thing would be fair and that the deserving would always get
what they deserve. They don
Õ
t! However, you obviously have no
chance to achieve your goals if you just sit there and wait for
lightning to strike.
We must grow. This book is devoted to exploring how you
manage your people, but equally important is seeing you grow
as a total person. Your career can add to your total growth, since
it
Õ
s such a large part of your life. We shouldnÕt work at a job
we don
Õ
t like, but on the other hand, we must be realistic in
recognizing that all careers contain aspects we don
Õ
t like. It
Õ
s the
balance that is important. If most of the job is enjoyable, satisfy-
ing, and challenging, then you can put up with the few parts
you don
Õ
t care for. If it
Õ
s the other way around and you dislike
most of what you have to do, youÕre obviously in the wrong
career and you ought to change it. Life is too short to spend time
and energy in a career that destroys you.
You have known people who stick with a job they donÕt like
because someday it will provide a great retirement beneÞt. What
good does that prospective retirement beneÞt do if people ruin
their health before they get to retirement? What
Õ
s worse, they
might not live that long.
There are also people who complain about a job constantly
but never seek a better job because their fear of change or the
unknown is more powerful than their dislike of the job. Some
people prefer the predictable (even if itÕs bad) over something
new or unknown.
Perhaps Abraham Lincoln was right when he said,ÔÔMost
people are about as happy as they make up their minds to be.ÕÕ
That summarizes what this book has addressed about the pri-
macy of attitudes.
Too many people, as they approach their middle years, start
thinking in terms of the kind of contribution they
Õ
re making to
the world. They often become depressed because they believe
what they
Õ
re doing is not very important. They ask themselves,
ÔÔHow signiÞcant is it that IÕm a manager in a company making
bolts?
ÕÕPut in that context, it may not seem terribly relevant. But
the question that should be asked is,ÔÔWhat kind of impact am I
PAGE 213.................11066$CONL 11-23-04 15:23:46 PS
214Conclusion
having on the people I come in contact with, both in my work
and in my personal life?
ÕÕ
If you can answer that question in a positive way, it doesnÕt
matter whether the company youÕre associated with is making
bolts or life-saving medicine. The system isnÕt the payoff; the
product isn
Õ
t the payoff; your impact on the people whose lives
you touch is what is important. Also, holding a position that is
a little higher on the organization chartdoes notmake you more
important than they are. An executive or a manager is a combi-
nation of leader and servant. Not many executives are willing
to accept the servant aspect of their responsibilities, because it
interferes with their exalted opinion of their rank.
In developing systems for your people to use, youÕre in fact
serving them. In maintaining a salary administration and per-
formance appraisal system, you
Õ
re serving them. In working out
vacation schedules that allow your people to maximize the bene-
Þ
ts of their relaxation time, youÕre serving them. In hiring and
training quality people for your department, you
Õ
re serving the
people who are already there.
Most people have no dif
Þ
culty understanding the proposi-
tion that the president of the United States has immense power
but is also a servant
Ñ
in fact, the number one public servant. The
same concept applies to managerial jobs. There is a combination
of what appear to be contradictory concepts: authority and a
responsibility to serve. If you can keep these in some semblance
of balance, you
Õ
ll avoid getting an inßated view of your own
importance. You
Õ
ll also do a better job.
You don
Õ
t necessarily get smarter. You gain more experi-
ence, which many people mistake for wisdom. It doesnÕt matter
what you call it as long as you continually become more effec-
tive. You become more effective as you develop a greater variety
of experiences in working with people. You gain little from re-
peating the same experiences except a smoothness that might
not otherwise develop.
And the point, although elementary, bears repetition: There
is a great deal to be gained from developing empathy for your
employees
Õattitudes and feelings. Can you really sense how
you
Õ
d want to be treated if you were in their position?
The best of success to you as you direct people in what
PAGE 214.................11066$CONL 11-23-04 15:23:46 PS
Conclusion215
amounts to nearly one-half of their waking hours. Your success
as a manager starts with you and your attitude toward that re-
sponsibility. It is hoped that this book has been of help to you at
the beginning of a new and exciting chapter in your life. Good
luck to you and enjoy the ride.
PAGE 215.................11066$CONL 11-23-04 15:23:46 PS
This page intentionally left blank
Index
absenteeism, 92
accountability, importance of, 46
achievement, need for, 118
active listening
as key management trait, 22,
26Ð27
skills, 24
agendas,seemeeting agendas
alertness approach, 40Ð42
Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), 98
applicants,seehiring procedure;
interviews
appreciation
importance of showing, 19, 21
as key work attribute, 21
steps in giving, 20
appropriateness recall, 185
arrogance, of new managers,
151Ð152
ÔÔattackerÕÕbehavior type, 54
attitude
determining during interview,
59Ð62
as key ingredient in new em-
ployees, 57
PAGE 217
217ÔÔattitude talkÕÕ
reason for, 66Ð67
sample, 66
timing, 67
authority
blind loyalty to, 32Ð33
prudent use of, 10
autocrat (personality style), 39Ð40
balance, need for, 207
behavioral competencies, as pre-
dictors of job success, 127
ÔÔbleeding heartÕÕbehavior type,
55
career, balancedvs.total growth,
213
ÔÔcentral tendency,ÕÕ138
change
acceptance of, 75Ð76
resistance to, 76Ð77
class, as managerial trait, 210Ð211
closed-ofÞce procedure, 170
coaching,seeperformance
coaching
comfort-zone underachiever
(CZU), 63Ð64
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:49 PS
218Index
ÔÔcomicÕÕbehavior type, 54
communication
active listening, 22, 24Ð25
conversation terminators,
25Ð26
deÞned, 29
information sharing, 106
open, 44, 136
too muchvs.too little, 107
in writing, 174Ð177
community service, managersÕ
role in, 208
company policies, consistent en-
forcement of, 92
ÔÔcomplainerÕÕbehavior type, 55
comprehension gap, 23
conÞdence
developing in employees,
15Ð17
quiet, 156
conversation terminators, 25Ð26
corporate decisions, questioning
of, 33
criticism, privatevs.public, 15Ð16
decision-making
involvement in process, 33
modes, 156Ð157
style, 156
delegating
beneÞts of, 180
vs.doling out, 180
new managersÕlack of, 181
sequential steps, 182
upward, 182
ÔÔdeserterÕÕbehavior type, 54
diplomat (personality style),
39Ð40
direct reports
communicating with, 9, 11Ð12
establishing comfort zone with,
12
maintaining friendship with,
12Ð13
disability
deÞned, 98
PAGE 218
as issue in hiring decisions,
98Ð99
disciplinary action
avoiding misunderstandings,
81Ð82
criticizing the personvs.the
work, 79Ð80, 82Ð83
for good employees gone bad,
83Ð84
importance of feedback, 79
leveling with employees, 92
probation, 86
salary increase withheld, 85Ð86
techniques, 85Ð86
two-way process, 80Ð81
downsizing, 90Ð91
dress codes, 162Ð163
ÔÔdrive time,ÕÕ42
education programs, taking ad-
vantage of, 162
e-mails
scheduling, 172
writing style, 177
emotional intelligence, 147
employee assistance programs, 51
employees,see alsoproblem em-
ployees
age differences, 119Ð120
building conÞdence, 15
building trust, 18
comfort-zone underachievers
(CZUs), 63Ð64
controlvs.encouragement of,
41
criticism of, 15Ð16
perfectionism expected from,
17
with personal hygiene issues,
85
with personal problems, 51Ð53
praise of, 15Ð16
satisfactory, 135Ð136
showing concern for, 29Ð30
training of new, 69Ð70
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:49 PS
Index 219
empowerment, 44
(EQ) emotional quotient
components, 148
deÞned, 147
determining level of, 149
effect on management success,
149
history, 147Ð149
Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA), 100Ð101
Federal Rehabilitation Act (1973),
99
feedback
importance of, 19
as key to discipline, 79
overdoing, 20
speciÞc, 20
during training, 72Ð73
Þring,seetermination
generation gap, 119Ð120
goal setting
importance of, 171
use of lists for, 168Ð169
Goleman, Daniel, 147
grapevine
managerÕs use of, 179
reducing incorrect speculation,
178
ÔÔhalo effect,ÕÕ137
hiring procedure
announcing the hire decision,
65
deÞned, 29
describing the job, 64Ð65
interview,seeinterviews
screening process, 56Ð58
test used in, 56
ÔÔhorns effect,ÕÕ137
human resources department
role in hiring, 108Ð109
role in promotions, 109Ð110
role in training, 110
PAGE 219
human skills,vs.technical abili-
ties, 12
humor, sense of
development of, 185
importance of, 184Ð185
managersÕencouragement of,
185Ð186
as tension reliever, 187
vs.sarcasm, 186
ÔÔimprovement seed,ÕÕ71Ð72
indispensability syndrome,
160Ð161
infallibility syndrome, 154
information sharing, 105
interpersonal competencies, as
predictors of job success, 127
interruptions, avoiding un-
wanted, 172
interviews,see alsoperformance
appraisals
after termination, 94
checklist, 139
questions by applicant, 60Ð62
questions by interviewer, 59Ð60
sample, 58Ð59
IQ (intellectual quotient)
effect on career success, 147
vs.EQ, 148
job
deÞned during training, 72Ð73
described during interview,
64Ð65
job descriptions
content, 126
and job scores, 127
three-tier approach, 126Ð127
job scoring, 127
job success
and emotional quotient, 149
predictors of, 127
Kaiser, Henry, 168
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:49 PS
220Index
leader, deÞned, 6
leadership
keys to effective, 45Ð46
servant aspect of, 214
ÔÔlimelight seekerÕÕbehavior type,
54
Lincoln, Abraham, 213
listening
active, 22, 24Ð25
comprehension gap, 23
poor, 23
loyalty
current perception of, 111
managerÕs responsibility, 111
management positions
chosen for, not earned, 6Ð7
decision not to pursue, 4Ð5
management-training
programs, 3Ð4
sink or swim method, 4
manager, new
acceptance of change, 75Ð76
alertness to staff needs, 40Ð42
authority used by, 10
big-picturevs.detail orienta-
tion, 31
dealing with older employees,
120Ð121
initial decisions of, 9
key ingredients for success,
214Ð215
managing feelings, 14
managing personal problems,
13Ð14, 51Ð53
managing tasks, 30Ð31
mistakes to avoid, 120
need to keep up to date,
208Ð209
personal touch used by, 11Ð13
restraint used by, 9
showing concern for employ-
ees, 29Ð30
managers
age differences, 119Ð120
PAGE 220
autocratsvs.diplomats, 39Ð40
behavioral types, 54Ð55
behavior of, 210Ð211
building good relationship
with, 34
communicating with, 35
dealing with unreasonable, 34Ð
35, 36
during downsizing, 90Ð91
impact on people, 213Ð214
information sharing by, 105
involvement in hiring, 108Ð109
key responsibilities, 28Ð29
as methodicals, 37Ð38
as mixers, 38
as monopolizers, 37
as motivators, 38
new,seemanager, new
ÔÔomnipotent,ÕÕ5Ð6
ÔÔpeopleÕÕvs.ÔÔthingÕÕoriented,
14
personality style, 37Ð38
providing feedback to, 35Ð36
self-image,seeself-image
style, 37Ð38
meeting agendas
early distribution of, 189
order of items, 190
meetings
agendas,seemeeting agendas
cost of, 188Ð189
follow-up action plans, 194
ground rules for, 193Ð194
minutes distribution, 192
new managersÕmistakes,
190Ð191
stand-up type, 194
tips for chairing, 192Ð194
mental imagery, 175Ð176
mentor, need for, 35
methodical (personality style),
37Ð38
mistakes, accepting responsibility
for, 153
mixer (personality style), 38
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:49 PS
Index 221
monitoring, deÞned, 29
monopolizer (personality style),
37
moods, effect on performance,
13Ð14
ÔÔmoonlighterÕÕbehavior type,
54Ð55
motivation
managerÕs role, 113Ð115
and status symbols, 116Ð117
subjectivity of, 118
and titles, 116
vs.positional power, 113
motivator (personality style), 38
ÔÔnot-my-jobberÕÕbehavior type,
55
objectivity, 155Ð156
ofÞce politics, 157Ð158
ÔÔomnipotentÕÕmanagers
effect of retirement on, 6
failure to delegate, 5Ð6
and staff turnover, 5
on-time habit, 173
open-door policy, 136
opportunism, 157Ð158
organizing, deÞned, 29
people orientation, 14
perfectionism, 17
performance appraisals
agenda, 134Ð135
behavioral comments used in,
138
documentation, 133
form, 131
importance of, 128Ð129
interviews, 132Ð133
legal requirement for, 129
managerÕs responsibilities, 130
as motivators, 139
need for objectivity, 132
of oneÕs successor, 158Ð159
post-interview checklist, 139
PAGE 221
questions to ask, 134
ranking system, 131Ð132
of satisfactory employees,
135Ð136
and self-evaluation, 133
subjectivity factors in, 136Ð138
performance coaching, 129
performance standards, need for,
78
personal problems, effect on per-
formance, 13Ð14
planning, deÞned, 29
positive self-talk, 152
praise
importance of, 19, 21
as key work attribute, 21
publicvs.private, 15Ð16
steps in giving, 20
predecessor
being measured against, 9
following oneÕs, 161
prejudicial mindset, 155
privacy, 100
probation, 86
problem employees
ÔÔconfrontation meeting,ÕÕ53
disciplining of,seedisciplinary
action
good employees gone bad,
83Ð84
managing challenging behav-
ior, 53Ð55
probation for, 86
rehabilitation of, 50Ð51
types, 54Ð55
professional associations, manag-
ersÕrole in, 208
project teams, 192
promotability, 165Ð166
promotion
of oneÕs successor, 158Ð159
using multiple choices, 159Ð160
public speaking
guidelines, 198Ð199
one-on-one coaching, 197
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:50 PS
222Index
public speaking (continued)
overcoming fear of, 196
preparation for, 195Ð196,
198Ð199
presentation skills training,
196Ð197
role in career success, 199
quality control, and training, 73
quiet conÞdence, 156
reading, value of, 208Ð209
ÔÔrecency effect,ÕÕ137
rehabilitation, of problem em-
ployees, 50Ð51
responsibilities, clearly deÞned,
45
reward systems, importance of, 46
RobertÕs Rules of Order,193
roles, clearly deÞned, 45
70/30 rule, 172
rumor,seegrapevine
salary administration
for long-term employees, 141
maintaining equity in pay,
141Ð142
ranges, 140, 141
salary recommendations
guidelines, 143
merit based, 143Ð144
sarcasm, 186
secrets, no need for, 105Ð106
self-contradiction, 154
self-fulÞlling prophecy, 151
self-image
effect on management success,
150Ð151
strategies for improving, 152
self-infatuation, 153Ð154
self-motivation, 113Ð114
self-promotion
need for subtlety, 164Ð165
suggestions for, 163Ð164
PAGE 222
sexual harassment
danger signs, 97
deÞned, 96Ð97
managerÕs role, 98
sponsor, value of, 166
status symbols, 117
stress,seework-related stress
ÔÔstrictness effect,ÕÕ137
style, importance of, 166
substance abuse, managerÕs role,
99Ð100
successor, preparing oneÕs,
158Ð159
Table Topics, 197
team spirit, key factors needed
for, 43Ð44
telephone calls, scheduling, 172
termination
after buyouts and mergers,
89Ð90
dismissal procedure, 93Ð94
interview, 94
key considerations prior to,
91Ð92
need for conÞdentiality, 93
need for objectivity, 95
preparing grounds for, 88Ð89
research on, 95
test, used in hiring, 56
three-tier approach, to writing job
descriptions, 126Ð127
time management
closed-ofÞce period, 170
importantvs.urgent tasks, 171
listing of goals, 168Ð169
quiet period, 170Ð171
ranking of tasks, 169
70/30 rule, 172
tips, 171Ð173
use of small segments, 167Ð168
titles
as motivators, 116
value of, 115Ð116
Toastmasters International, 196
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:50 PS
Index 223
to-do lists,seetime management
trainer
need for diplomacy, 73
role of, 70Ð71
training
deÞned, 29
end of probationary period, 74
feedback during, 72Ð73
of new employees, 69Ð70
planting the improvement seed,
71Ð72
and quality control, 73
of successor, 70
trust, strategies for building, 18
understatement, managerial, 10
violence in workplace
danger signs, 101Ð102
PAGE 223
examples, 101
managerÕs role, 102
visualization, 152
win-win strategy, 152
work-related stress
converting fear into challenge,
205
lessened by experience, 206
of new managers, 204
suggestions for dealing with,
205
and taking work home, 209
types of, 203Ð204
writing
formalvs.informal, 177
lack of experience in, 175
mental imagery used in,
175Ð176
overcoming fear of, 174Ð177
and test syndrome, 174
.................11066$INDX 11-23-04 15:23:50 PS